CHAPTER 5

TECHNICAL FOUNDATIONS FOR
DECENTRALISED COOPERATION
5.1 Preliminaries

I

n 1678, thirty years after the Peace of Westphalia, the German philosopher Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz wrote to the Duke of Hanover
proposing a permanent archive of documents for governance purposes.
When that fell on deaf ears, Leibniz made the proposal again in 1680
to the Duke’s successor. Again, it fell on deaf ears. But who is Leibniz?
What was his proposal? And what does it have to do with the future of
governance?
In addition to his writing on metaphysics (for example, on
monads), Leibniz was known for his debates with Isaac Newton’s
associate Samuel Clarke about the nature of space and motion, for his
work on the philosophy of religion, and for his work on the theory of
knowledge. Leibniz is perhaps best known for independently inventing the calculus (indeed, inventing a version of the notation we use
today). Although not his most well-known work, he wrote a tremendous amount on political philosophy, law and government. And these
are the writings that concern us here – especially, as they relate to
government archives.


When Leibniz wrote to the successive Dukes of Hanover, he
described his archive project as ‘a place where writings useful for government are kept in such a way that they rest intact and unaltered for
future information, and that in that occasion they can be used as certified proofs in justice.’ Contemporary Brazilian philosopher Ulysses
Pinheiro provided a helpful summary of the project, noting that the
idea was to create ‘an instrument with a fundamental concern over the
future actions of a Prince. It has the epistemic value of a virtual mechanism guiding the Prince’s actions.’
Leibniz was apparently obsessed with his idea for an archive. In his
proposal to the Dukes of Hanover, he went into great detail on how
they should secure records. He proposed that the structure housing the
records be protected so as to adequately preserve the documents from
mould, mice and worms, as well as from fire and attack of enemies. He
added that its internal vaults should be reinforced, and its doors should
be made of iron. The most important original documents should be
kept in a safe and hidden in a wall.1
One thing that Leibniz, for all his genius (and despite himself
being very much a decentraliser), apparently did not envision was that
these records could be decentralised and thus made even more secure.
But how are they more secure?
As we will see, centralised record repositories create points of
failure in governance. They provide vectors of attack for internal and
external enemies, they are magnets for corruption, and they are susceptible to destruction from natural causes (for example, from mould,
mice, worms and fire). Decentralisation, we will argue, is necessary
to make archives secure. It is not surprising that Leibniz failed to see
this despite him being a decentraliser regarding political sovereignty
and even in his work on metaphysics (his use of monads, in particular,
Ulysses Pinheiro, ‘Leibniz on the Concepts of Archive, Memory, and Sovereignty’, Für Unser
Glück Oder Das Glück Anderer, 3 (2016), 309–21 <https://www.academia.edu/39198781/Leibniz_on_the_Concepts_of_Archive_Memory_and_Sovereignty> [accessed 16 April 2023].


was a kind of decentralising project). His proposal was more than
three centuries before Satoshi’s white paper, after all, and no one has
perfect foresight.
In this chapter and the next, we will develop some of Leibniz’s
ideas in ways we think he would like were he alive today. In this chapter, we will discuss immutable records and how they are only made
possible by decentralised protocols, and we will lay out the theory of
secure decentralised protocols. In the next chapter, we will explore how
certain immutable records, in the form of onchain smart contracts, can
be leveraged into ‘virtual mechanisms’, not merely ‘guiding the Prince’s
actions’ but executing those actions automatically.

5.2 Immutable records
In May 1747, Don Giuseppe Rapaccioli, a parish priest in Macinesso,
Italy, was supervising the renovation of a field near his church when he
came across a large bronze plaque containing Latin inscriptions. Today
called the Tabula Alimentaria Traiana, it measures 1.38 metres high
and 2.86 metres long. It is, to this day, the largest bronze inscription
from antiquity that has been found. Further study of the Tabula dated
it to 112 CE, during the reign of the Roman Emperor Trajan (Traiana
signifying its relation to Trajan).2
In the early second century CE, Trajan instituted an alimentary
programme in towns throughout the Italian peninsula. This programme encouraged landowners to take out loans from the government
by mortgaging their property. The interest on these loans was paid in
the form of a food stipend for children in the respective areas. In other
words, landowners could borrow money from the government using
their land as collateral, provided that the interest was paid as assistance
Gianluca Bottazzi, ‘Varsi E La Tabula Alimentaria Di Veleia’, ValcenoStoria, 2020 <https://
www.valcenostoria.it/2021/08/21/varsi-e-la-tabula-alimentaria-di-veleia-by-g-bottazzi-r/>
[accessed 24 January 2024].


to local poor children. Emperor Trajan thus used short-term bribes to
incentivise landowners to look after local children in the long term.3
In this particular case, the bronze Tabula codified the details of
Trajan’s alimentary project in Veleia, a rural northern Italian town near
the Roman colony of Placentia (now known as Piacenza). The recorded
information on the plaque included the debtors’ names, the location
and value of their property, and the loans they received for that mortgaged land (generally, a little over 8% of the land’s appraised value).
This bronze plaque had certain important features that we are interested in. It was public; everyone in the town could see it, and everyone
knew what was owed and what the landowners were expected to pay
for the children. Second, it was, for all practical purposes, immutable.
It was cast in bronze, after all. Not one detail had changed between the
time it was lost and its discovery by Father Rapaccioli in 1747.4
Not only was the information in the Tabula public and functionally immutable, but it also had a ‘cybernetic’ effect (in the sense of the
ancient Greek origins of the term). By making responsibilities public,
it helped to ensure that those responsibilities were carried out. Everyone knew what was expected. Thus, it was not merely information but
information that had a governing function. Of course, the encoded
information could not guarantee that Trajan’s policy would be carried out. Yet, whoever made the Tabula presumably assumed it would
encourage people to fulfil their obligations or possibly feel shame if
they failed to live up to them.
We can also imagine a scenario in which recorded information has
a direct causal role by being encoded in a computer program that might
reliably act on the information. We will develop this in the next chapter,
Here, we set aside questions about the nobility of Trajan’s programme, which was probably
motivated by a concern that rural regions of the empire would become depopulated.
Strictly speaking, it was not absolutely immutable. Obviously, changes can be made to
bronze plaques; in this case, changes were indeed made. The Tabula was updated through the
years before it was lost. In fact, there has been a dispute about whether variation in orthography on the Tabula is a result of error or changes in Latin over the years the Tabula was in use.


but for now, let us focus on the importance of secure information and
think about what happens when reliable records are not available.
Detailed records have been vital to human governance since the
earliest civilisations on record. The ancient Sumerians left behind a
detailed record in the form of cuneiform writing on clay tablets. Subsequent civilisations in the Near East (the Babylonians, Assyrians,
Elamites, Hurrians, Kassites and Hittites) also made extensive use of
cuneiform records to extend the scope of their governmental control,
so much so that we now know their legal record keeping as cuneiform
law. The most famous case of this legal record keeping is the Code of
Hammurabi, which remains one of the most well-preserved legal texts
of the era. Cuneiform law became not only a way of regularising the
administration of justice but also a means of tying together the administration of perhaps the world’s earliest empire and projecting its force
throughout Mesopotamia.5
It is worth emphasising the role that proper record keeping plays
in the administration of justice, for we seldom think about just how
important reliable records are. A more contemporary illustration may
bring this point home.
In 2008, a group of students from the Pepperdine Caruso School
of Law went to Uganda, participating in a project to modernise the
Ugandan legal system. One of the most salient facts that stood out to
the students was the poor state of the legal records. A campus newspaper reported on their findings: ‘Archives are designed to serve as an area
where law precedent is carefully stored, indexed and readily available to
the judges. This archive, however, was located deep in the basement of
the High Court’s building and consisted of hundreds of unorganized
case files dumped into a dark and dirty closet.’6
Encyclopedia Britannica, ‘Cuneiform Law’, Britannica <https://www.britannica.com/
topic/cuneiform-law> [accessed 28 October 2024].
Joy Lynn Cole McMillon, ‘Law Students Leave Lasting Mark on Uganda’s Court System’, 2008 <https://law.pepperdine.edu/surf-report/posts/law-students-leave-lastingmark-on-ugandas-court-system.htm> [accessed 16 April 2023].


The first point of note here is that if there is no reliable record
of legal decisions, there is no meaningful notion of judicial precedent. Every case must be argued anew, based not on precedent but on
whatever reasoning the local justice chooses to apply. Apart from the
inconsistency that this generates in legal decisions, it slows the process
considerably if every case needs to be reasoned from scratch.
This leads to a related point that might not occur to First-World
citizens. There is a financial cost to record keeping. In the Western
world, judges and courts have nearly unlimited access to clerks and stenographers and other ways of recording deliberations and decisions.
However, in places like Uganda, this cannot be taken as a given. This
too was noted by the Pepperdine article: ‘This East African country
doesn’t have sufficient funding to provide judges with support staff or
clerks; they must research, develop and write the decisions on their
own. Additionally, High Courts have no court reporters to record trial
proceedings, so the judges must hand-write notes.’ As Pepperdine law
student Greer Illingworth put it, ‘“the proceedings can only move as
fast as the judge takes notes.”’7
Situations like this do not merely slow down the proceedings; they
leave thousands of people in perilous legal limbo. As the students discovered, there were more than a few remanded minors living in squalid
conditions with no reliable record of their case histories, including the
charges against them, nor any prospect of timely resolutions of their
cases. Failed record keeping put them into dangerous legal limbo.
Failed record keeping can also lead us to lose track of governmental
atrocities, as the students learned while exploring the dingy basement
that served as a repository for Uganda’s legal system: ‘Students stumbled across a turquoise book marked “Confidential” amid the piles of
legal papers. Curious, they soon realised that they had found hundreds
of execution orders given by Idi Amin, military dictator and president
of Uganda from 1971–1979.’8

Ibid.
Ibid.


It may be surprising just how fragile record keeping has been
through the centuries. For example, during revolutionary periods, one
of the first and most important objectives for the revolutionaries is
to find and destroy the records of the existing regime. Among other
things, records contain files on dissidents and details of their arrests and
activities. Destroying such records can protect dissidents from government retaliation.
Another target has been records of property ownership. In the earlier Russian revolution of 1905 (what Lenin called ‘the dress rehearsal’
for the revolution of 1917), peasants attacked the estates of landowners and destroyed physical property and, notably, debt records.9
Similarly, in the Mexican Revolution, Emiliano Zapata’s revolutionaries destroyed the previous regime’s records of land ownership.
The case of the Mexican Revolution is particularly apt because
records (and the lack of records) played a role on both sides of the conflict. Perhaps initiating the revolution were the actions of the haciendas
– large estates that seized ancestral land claims from poor farmers, a
crime made possible by the lack of permanent records of ownership.
When Zapata’s men attacked the haciendas, among the principal targets were the newly minted records of ownership. A fascinating collection of papers assembled by Carlos Aguirre and Javier Villa-Flores
documents numerous examples of this sort of archival conflict in Latin
America. It is a tradition that begins with the destruction of Mayan
records by the conquistadors in 1530, an event that was followed by
the destruction of twenty-seven Mayan codices by Diego de Landa,
the Bishop of Yucatán, in 1566.10 Reporting on the atrocity, de Landa
himself noted, ‘We found a large number of these books, and, as they
contained nothing in which there was not to be seen superstition and

Mark D. Steinberg, The Russian Revolution, 1905-1921, 1st ed. (Oxford, 2017).
Carlos Aguirre and Javier Villa-Flores, From the Ashes of History: Loss and Recovery of
Archives and Libraries in Modern Latin America (Chapel Hill, NC, 2015).


the lies of the devil, we burned them all, which they regretted to an
amazing degree and which caused them great affliction.’11
The history of archival conflict proceeded through the destruction
of records of the Spanish Inquisition to the destruction of municipal
archives during an uprising in Mexico City in 1630. It continued all
the way through the twentieth century, during which the destruction of
archives remained a robust tradition during times of political conflict.
We have already mentioned Zapata’s destruction of records of property
ownership; this is a strategy that was repeated in El Salvador in 1932
when Red Commanders destroyed the property records in every town
they occupied.12
Of course, economic records such as ownership and debt are not
the only targets of archival destruction; cultural records are routinely
destroyed as well. This was certainly the goal in the destruction of the
Mayan codices in the sixteenth century. As Aguirre and Villa-Flores
point out, the problem is not just with intentional efforts to destroy
records but also the fact that records can be subject to lack of attention,
natural disasters and so on.
Earlier, we mentioned the case of the poorly maintained legal
records in Uganda. However, there are many examples of this in Latin
America as well, including the Lima–Callao earthquake of 1746 and,
more recently, the tragic 2015 fire in the National Museum of Brazil
that destroyed 92.5% of its repository of 20 million items, including its
archive of indigenous languages. An employee of the Federal University
of Rio de Janeiro announced the tragedy to online linguists:
Folks, there’s nothing left from the Linguistics division. We lost
all the indigenous languages collection: the recordings since
1958, the chants in all the languages for which there are no
Inga Clendinnen, Ambivalent Conquests: Maya and Spaniard in Yucatan, 1517-1570
(Cambridge, 1987), 70.
Aguirre and Villa-Flores, From the Ashes of History.


native speakers alive anymore, the Curt Nimuendajú archives:
papers, photos, negatives, the original ethnic-historic-linguistic
map localizing all the ethnic group in Brazil, the only record
that we had from 1945. The ethnological and archeological
references of all ethnic groups in Brazil since the 16th century… An irreparable loss of our historic memory. It just hurts
so much to see all in ashes.13
What does the loss of cultural information have to do with governance? Well, culture plays a role in the unification of people for a
common cause. Good governments often take on the responsibility of
preserving cultural records, not just because it is a good thing to do, but
because the very identity and existence of the government often depend
on these cultural archives (think of the role the French government plays
in maintaining the Louvre or the role the Italian government plays in
maintaining the Uffizi). Even if we think that governments should have
nothing to do with preserving national culture, there are still institutions that will be charged with protecting cultural heritage, and those
institutions also need proper governance, even if it is self-governance.
It is important to understand that the loss of archives is not the
only pain point. A similar effect can be achieved by restricting access to
archives. To put it another way, you do not need to destroy the archives
if you can instead make them inaccessible. And for sure, there are plenty
of information archives throughout the world that remain inaccessible,
either because they are classified or private or behind a paywall – a
point that was made clear by Aaron Swartz in his Guerilla Open Access
Manifesto.14
Why does all this matter? Because archives and access to the information contained in those archives are critical to freedom, democracy
<https://m.facebook.com/story.php?story_fbid=10107422574817418&id=5740086> [accessed
28 October 2024].
Peter Ludlow, ‘Aaron Swartz Was Right’, The Chronicle of Higher Education, 2013 <https://
www.chronicle.com/article/aaron-swartz-was-right/> [accessed 2 January 2024].


and, certainly, our ability to know whether our government is functioning as it promised (whether that government is democratically chosen or not). Jacques Derrida summarised the importance of archives to
governance as follows: ‘There is no political power without control of
the archive, if not of memory. Effective democratization can always be
measured by this essential criterion: the participation in and access to
the archive, its constitution, and its interpretation.’15
In his discussion of Leibniz’s proposal for an archive in conjunction
with the philosopher’s views of national sovereignty, Pinheiro argued
that, to some extent, the very existence of the state is a function of
the archives it keeps.16 If this sounds implausible, it should not. If the
archives contain evidence of treaties and land ownership and citizenship and economic contracts, then at the very minimum, one can reconstruct the state, its borders and its interests from a well-maintained
archive. Were the archive to disappear due to an ‘archive bomb’, it is not
at all clear that the state would be able to persist in its pre-bombing
form. Indeed, on reflection, an archive bomb would be at least as devastating as Tom W. Bell’s law bomb because the law is dependent on the
existence of functioning archives.
If we think of a government as a body, then information archives
are its DNA; they are the information within the cells of the organisation that guides it in what organs to make and where and how they
should be regulated. Similarly, archives are not just things that states
keep. Archives are critical to the very identity of the state. We believe
this also holds true at every level of governance.
Now, we get to the real challenge. Archives are not only under
threat from conquistadors and revolutionaries and fire and earthquakes.
Because they are under centralised control, they are also vulnerable
to the corruption and ineptitude of record keepers. Is there a way to


Derrida, Archive Fever.
Pinheiro, ‘Leibniz on the Concepts of Archive, Memory, and Sovereignty’, 309–21.


decentralise record keeping and thus make records safer? This is one of
the great promissory notes of blockchain technology.

5.3 Decentralised cooperation
One of the more infamous examples of record destruction happened
on 7 December 1985, when Pablo Escobar paid the left-wing guerrilla
group M-19 (the 19 April Movement) to invade Colombia’s Supreme
Court building in Bogotá and destroy records related to criminal cases
being built against Escobar and other narcotraficantes. If Pablo’s son
is to be believed, this was accomplished for the low price of $1 million – peanuts to an international drug trafficker.17 The damage went
far beyond the documents in the case against Escobar. According to
Mark Bowden in his book Killing Pablo, the attack destroyed documents for 6,000 pending criminal cases and ‘crippled the Colombian
legal system’.18
We can, of course, attempt to armour our central points of failure (as Leibniz proposed to the Dukes of Hanover), but sadly, these
attempts are inherently vulnerable to all manner of attack. Pablo Escobar chose the crude method of a guerrilla military operation, but softer
methods are often just as successful.
There is a reason why the Defense Advanced Research Projects
Agency (DARPA) funded the early stages of the Internet. A decentralised (or at least more decentralised) network is less vulnerable to attack.
In theory, it should even survive a nuclear war. Similarly, if we want
our documents and records of value to survive attack, then we should
Whether Escobar’s son is a reliable source is another question. In the same 2014
interview, he said that Pablo was not killed but committed suicide. Whatever the actual
price, the important point is that a centralised store of records creates a point of vulnerability. The Spanish language interview can be found online here: <https://www.wradio.
com.co/noticias/actualidad/pablo-escobar-se-suicido-no-lo-mataron-su-hijo/20141106/
nota/2495321.aspx> [accessed 30 October 2024].
Bowden is a journalist that is perhaps better known for his book Blackhawk Down.


consider decentralised networks. However, slogans about decentralisation aside, this turns out to be easier said than done.
If a centralised repository of records represents a point of failure,
then it would be natural to assume that a decentralised network represents multiple points of failure. However, the difference is that a decentralised network can be fault tolerant. Nodes in the network can fail,
but the network keeps humming. You see this in the case of the Internet. If an Internet node goes down, the entire Internet does not fail.
As we will see in the next section, fault tolerance takes on a whole new
dimension with regards to matters of money and control.
Most of the institutions of trust that we engage with today are centralised. For example, our national governments are typically central
governing bodies that sit in a national capital. Most nations issue their
own currency, which is under the control of a central bank. So too,
our various institutions of financial trust are centralised. We trust large
banks to accurately record how much money is in our accounts and
our financial transactions. If we wire $100 to your account from our
account, our bank debits our account $100. If we use the same bank, our
bank simply credits your account $100 – no coins or dollar bills or bars
of gold move. There is just a simple change on a ledger that the bank
keeps. If we use different banks then our bank will credit the account of
your receiving bank, and this will be recorded by a centralised interbank
protocol like SWIFT.
Similarly, if we buy land, its ownership is recorded by some single
official record keeper. In the United States, that would be a title company. In Mexico (prior to 2016), it would have been a local notaría.
Perhaps you worry that your title company in the United States might
misfile something or overlook a dispute about who owns your property.
That is why we have title insurance. However, as with everything else,
title insurance is recorded with a centralised institution.
The problem with centralisation is that it represents a massive point
of failure for any system, whether it is governmental or financial. Pablo
Escobar showed us how centralised legal records represent a point


of failure, but this is true for all kinds of record keeping. If ‘official’
financial records are stored in a single centralised location, then those
records can be destroyed by targeting that single location. Centralised
records are also targets for corruption. If a record of property ownership is controlled by a single notaría, the notaría becomes a target for
bribery and extortion and thus becomes the point of failure for the
property ownership system. If the official copy of the records is moved
to a central government office, then that government office becomes a
target for corruption.
The same can be said for national currencies, government policies
and other societal institutions. If there is a central authority, then that
central authority becomes an attack vector for enemies and an opportunity for individuals to game the system for their own benefit. And it
may be a very banal form of corruption at the end of the day. After all,
central bankers have friends, and they are apt to be part of a wealthy
class of individuals. Thus, central bankers are likely to take on the attitudes of their small class of friends. Does this make them corrupt or
evil? Well, that is not the issue; more pressing is whether such decisions should rest in the hands of a few central authorities – authorities
that are vulnerable to falling under the influence of a small number of
individuals. It does not matter whether that influence is driven by force
or corruption or simply the interests of close friends. The end result is
the same.
We all know that corruption and more benign forms of influence
exist, and we certainly know that there are countries and institutions
where corruption and the exercise of political influence are particularly
rampant. However, rather than criticise the tools that we use for governance, we are often critical of the morals of corrupt and inappropriately
influenced individuals. For sure, there are some morally reprehensible
people out there engaging in all sorts of corruption. However, corruption has been a thing for the entire history of human governance. While
it might give us a sense of satisfaction to be critical of the individuals
caught in the corruption and influence game, it would be much more


effective to avoid governance architectures that invite such corruption
and influence peddling.
It is worth noting that many individuals have played the corruption
game because they had no choice. As Colombian officials found in the
days of Pablo Escobar, there was often an ultimatum: plata or plombo
(silver or lead) – ‘take the bribe and do what we want, or you and your
family may suffer physical harm.’ We can blame people who cave to this
pressure if we want, but it makes far more sense to attack the root of the
problem, which is centralised governance structures.
You might think that human governance cannot be any other
way than centralised because, after all, someone has to keep these
records. If everyone kept their own record, surely there would be disputes. How would we even resolve those disputes if not through some
central authority that had access to the correct or official record of
ownership?
It is one thing to say that you do not like centralised records, but it
is quite another matter to figure out what the decentralised alternative
might be. The first thought is that we could simply make copies of the
record and distribute it to everyone in the network. However, this raises
the question of what happens when disputes arise. What if our records
are inconsistent? The temptation is to think that there should be some
centralised official record that we can check against, but now we are
back in the business of centralised record keeping, and that is the very
thing we are trying to get away from.
Centralised record keeping presents numerous points of weakness, but as we are about to see, decentralised networks have their
own problems that we will need to address. One such problem is the
‘double-spending problem’. Suppose that we offer to buy a widget
from you for $100. You check the shared distributed ledger and confirm that we have $101 in our account, so we should be able to pay.
You send us the widget, and you deduct the $100 from our account.
However, what you did not realise is that just as we were buying the
widget from you, we were buying a $100 cog from Smith. Smith


also consulted their copy of the ledger, saw that we had $101 in our
account and sent us the cog. Clearly, it is not possible for both you and
Smith to be paid. Who is right?
This is the problem: if there are many nodes in the network, there
can be bad actors at any of those nodes. Does decentralisation not just
increase our headaches when it comes to failure and corruption?

5.4 Byzantine generals, decentralisation and Satoshi
The double-spending problem is just one instance of a class of problems that every decentralised network has to confront. In 1982, Leslie
Lamport, Robert Shostak and Marshall Pease released a research paper
titled ‘The Byzantine Generals Problem’,19 which gave the class of problems the name by which we know it today.
Here is one version of the problem: several Byzantine generals must
participate in a coordinated attack on a city, each at the head of an
army. It is a critical point that the attack must be coordinated. If too
few armies attack, they will be crushed. However, now we encounter
several problems. One problem is that the generals must communicate
with each other in what is effectively a hostile environment. What if
the messenger gets intercepted? Well, you could wait for a responding
message that your initial message was received. But how does the other
general know you received the response? Do you have to respond that
you got the confirmation? For a coordinated attack, it is not enough
for everyone to receive the attack message; everyone has to know that
everyone received it, and they have to know that everyone knows that
everyone received it and so on.
However, there are more problems. A coordinated attack may also
fail due to traitorous generals. Or perhaps, it will fail merely due to
incompetent generals sleeping off their hangovers. Therefore, we must
Leslie Lamport, Robert Shostak and Marshall Pease, ‘The Byzantine Generals Problem’,
ACM Transactions on Programming Languages and Systems, 4/3 (1982).


plan our attack in a way that is ‘fault tolerant’ – the attack must be successful even if there are weak links among our generals. This is ‘Byzantine fault tolerance’.
This problem has been with us for as long as we have had to engineer
distributed systems. Research on Byzantine fault tolerance (although
not under that name) began in the 1950s and mainly revolved around
the aviation industry. To see why, consider an aeroplane with multiple
computers that might fail. You do not want one failure to bring down
the whole system, but how do we engineer around these inevitable
failures?
In the 1970s, researchers at Draper Laboratory published a technical report on the fault-tolerant multiprocessor (FTMP) – a multiprocessor computer that eliminates single-fault vulnerability for aircraft
modules. During the same decade, Honeywell developed the multimicroprocessor flight control system (MMFCS), which focused on
the detection of Byzantine failures. Then, in 1981, SRI International
published a technical report for aircraft control computers called ‘The
software-implemented fault tolerance /SIFT/ approach to fault tolerant computing’.
As noted, these papers were connected with the aerospace industry,
where there are plenty of distributed systems and where some failure
is inevitable but the wrong kind of failure could be catastrophic. It was
not for nothing that the research behind the ‘Byzantine Generals Problem’ paper by Lamport, Shostak and Pease was funded by NASA, the
Ballistic Missile Defense Systems Command and the Army Research
Office.
In 1998, Lamport wrote another important paper in which he
offered a solution to the Byzantine Generals Problem in the form of
the Paxos protocol. The point of departure for Lamport’s paper is the
Aegean island of Paxos, which in ancient times was (we are told) run
by a ‘part-time’ parliament. It was part-time because trade was a bigger
priority than governance for the governing citizens; no one in Paxos
could afford to be a full-time member of the island’s parliament – they


all needed to be travelling and trading. This meant that the government
had to find a way to function even while its voting leaders and members
came and went, and each would need their own record of parliamentary
decisions while they travelled.
The analogy to distributed systems and the problem of Byzantine
fault tolerance should be clear. Members of the parliament would be
voting on important measures at different times. Many people would
not have access to a centralised ledger, and in point of fact, if people
were allowed to vote while travelling, even a central ledger at the capital
would not be completely up to date.
No one knows how Paxos carried out this feat, so Lamport spun a
story of an imaginary protocol in which records of votes would be copied and distributed. Each member of parliament would have their own
version of a complete record of all the votes submitted thus far – i.e. state
descriptions of the protocol. People could then update their copy of the
record with their votes using indelible ink. When disputes arose over
conflicting ledgers, there would be votes to determine which m
 odified
state description would be deemed official – the official description
would be the one that ultimately received the majority vote (this vote
could take some time for obvious reasons). In effect, you would not only
be voting on policies but also on the official record of additions to the
record of votes and policies.20
Notice that this is quite a good solution to some varieties of the
Byzantine Generals Problem. If you have a way of tracking which decisions have a majority vote and everyone has a record of that, then if a
majority of the armies is sufficient to carry out the attack, you are in a
good position. The solution only breaks down if most of the generals
are corrupt.
The Paxos protocol resolved some issues with distributed networks,
but it did not resolve all of them, and we mentioned one such problem
earlier – the double-spend problem. Recall that this is a case where we

Lamport, ‘The Part-Time Parliament’.


have $101 and purchase a $100 widget from you and a $100 cog from
Smith, but neither of you is aware of the scam because you are both
working from records (state descriptions) that show that I have enough
money to pay for the product.
This leads us to the 2008 publication of Satoshi Nakamoto’s Bitcoin
white paper and the subsequent implementation of Bitcoin in 2009.
Many people understandably think of Bitcoin as being a virtual coin of
sorts (‘coin’ is in its name, after all), but that is a very weak metaphor. If
you are a so-called ‘whole coiner’, who owns one bitcoin (BTC), there
is no coin sitting in a repository somewhere. It is much better to think
of the Bitcoin protocol as a decentralised record or ledger that keeps
track of who holds what – a ledger that is immutable (like the Tabula
Alimentaria Traiana) and which is visible to all (as was the Tabula) but
which, unlike the Tabula, is a decentralised record. It is not located in
one place, but control of the record is distributed across the network.
This has the advantage that it does not have a single point of attack, but
it still must encounter the Byzantine Generals Problem, and in particular, the double-spend problem, which heretofore had not been solved.
Here lies the monumental genius of Satoshi’s white paper.
Rather than having a single centralised authority that determines
the official version of the blockchain, that determination can be a
rotating responsibility. Furthermore, we can prove whether a proffered
version of the blockchain is the official version. There are many ways to
execute this general strategy successfully. However, it is worth beginning with Satoshi’s approach, which Bitcoin still uses to this day: ‘proof
of work’.
There are three fundamental questions that a distributed ledger has
to answer. First, how do we select which version of the ledger is the
official version? Second, how do we prove that a proffered version of
the ledger is the officially selected version? Third, how does the protocol protect itself against bad actors? Satoshi’s proposal solves all three
problems with one idea: the aforementioned proof-of-work protocol.


The person who gets to declare the official version of the ledger is
the first person who solves a certain cryptographic puzzle. The complexity of the puzzle is weighted in such a way that a new block (a new
official version of the ledger) is produced roughly every ten minutes.
The output of that effort answers question number two because that
output is a ‘cryptographic hash’ that can tell us in short order whether
a proffered version of the ledger is the new official version.21 If one
digit in the ledger has changed (one digit in the entire history of the
ledger), then the hash will be completely different. Think of the hash as
perfectly reliable evidence that the blockchain you are looking at is the
official version at a specific date and time. The people who deploy computer hardware attempting to solve the puzzle and create the blocks
(and earn rewards for doing so) are called ‘miners’.22
We now have a way of selecting the ‘official’ block, and we have a
way of proving whether we are looking at that official block. But what
about the bad actors part? The protocol incentivises those participating in the network’s operation to maintain the ledger’s integrity in the
form of block rewards, distributed in BTC. Bad actors can be penalised – they can be denied their block rewards. Given their massive
energy expenses and investment in equipment, a rational actor with
finite resources would consider such a strategy too costly, given their
massive energy expenses and investment in equipment, when they
could simply deploy the same resources and earn profit by following
the network rules.
Similarly, a problem could arise if bad actors were able to create the
official blocks most of the time. However, the only way to achieve that
is to acquire enough hashing power to solve the cryptographic puzzles more often than all other participants combined. To do that, they
We can think of the cryptographic hash as being like an electronic signature that can
verify the integrity of some file (in this case the ledger). If one element in the file is changed,
then the correct hash (the signature) will not be produced. The signature thus serves as a
proof that the ledger has not been corrupted.
The computers used to do the hashing are also called ‘miners’.


would need to amass computer hashing power greater than half of the
sum total of all the other computers in the network. Strictly speaking,
this is not impossible, but it would be astoundingly expensive to acquire
that much hashing power and pay for the energy necessary to solve the
hashing puzzles. Estimates made in 2021 put the energy consumption
of Bitcoin as comparable to that of Finland,23 so anyone wanting to
corrupt the blockchain would have to be prepared to expend more than
half that much in energy consumption alone. Plus, there is the cost of
acquiring control of all the necessary mining equipment.
This was perhaps the most profound insight of Satoshi’s proposal.
You do not have to make attacks impossible; you just have to make
them cost-ineffective. It is not impossible to break Bitcoin; it is just
not worth the expense. As mentioned, proof of work is just one way
to engineer Byzantine fault tolerance and resolve the double-spending
problem. There are a number of alternative protocols available now,
but one important class of strategies that we should remark on here is
‘proof-of-stake’ protocols.
With proof of work, the idea was to secure the network by making
the costs of being a bad actor prohibitive; one would have to acquire
more than half the hashing power of the network. To date, this has
been a successful strategy, but it has also drawn criticism over its energy
usage. Whether, in the big picture, it actually poses an environmental
problem is up for debate (a good case can be made that it helps make
renewable energy sources profitable).24 However, it does raise the question of whether other options are available. Proof of stake (PoS) is one
such option.
Jon Huang, Claire O’Neill and Hiroko Tabuchi, ‘Bitcoin Uses More Electricity Than
Many Countries: How Is That Possible?’, New York Times, 9 March 2021 <https://www.
nytimes.com/interactive/2021/09/03/climate/bitcoin-carbon-footprint-electricity.html>
[accessed 28 October 2024].
The idea is that for many renewable energy sources like wind, much of the energy production goes to waste, but the energy produced in off-peak hours can be used to mine
Bitcoin, radically improving the profitability of the renewable energy method used.


In the case of PoS, the network is secured by block-creating nodes
staking cryptocurrency (for example, ETH) as a kind of guarantee that
they will maintain the system’s integrity honestly. Instead of getting to
create a block by solving a cryptographic puzzle, your entitlement to
create a block is a function of how much of the asset you have staked.
The more you stake, the better your chances of being the node that gets
to create the block. There is some computing involved, but only as much
as is necessary to assemble the block and generate a cryptographic hash
for it. We will get into the finer details of this later, including questions
about the degree to which PoS really is decentralised and how it can be
gamed, but for now, we just want to focus on the general idea and how
it qualifies as a version of decentralised governance.
There are, of course, other protocols, but for the moment, we set
those aside because there is a more pressing issue. We have seen how
immutable public archives are important and also how it is crucial to
their security that they be decentralised. We have also seen that in the
last few decades, we have developed general strategies for decentralised
computation, culminating in the proof-of-work and proof-of-stake
protocols. But this is only a glimpse of what these new technologies
can offer us. Not only can we look forward to decentralised ledgers, but
as we will see in the next chapter, decentralised smart contracts will also
open up a whole new world of possibilities for human governance.

