CHAPTER 14

14.1 Preliminaries

B

ack in Chapters 5 and 6, we laid out the basic technical tools that
underlie blockchain technologies. We discussed how proof of work
and proof of stake worked, how smart contracts worked, and so on. That
was enough for us to discuss some of the general conceptual issues we
have addressed thus far, but along the way, we frequently promised that
we would eventually go into more detail about those technologies. In
this chapter, we make good on that promise.
In saying this, we do not mean we are going to provide the only
way of fleshing out the technical details. In point of fact, there is more
than one technological solution; there are many promising technologies that already exist or that are being developed or that someone will
think of soon enough. Our goal here is to describe the strategies that
we like best, which include the tools that have been developed by the
Institute of Free Technology, with some words along the way about the
technologies that inspired them as well as our current understanding of
the technological landscape.
These strategies are the ones that we have selected to talk about,
given the needs, interests and abilities of existing blockchain communities and their members. You may have identified other needs, interests


and abilities and may prefer a different set of strategies. That is to be
expected. Our goal here is simply to lay out one approach to the available technologies and explain how it works and why people were motivated to develop this package of technologies. You are, of course, free to
disagree with us and suggest that alternative technologies would do a
better job addressing the limitations we discussed. We would welcome
the mere existence of such debates, as it would be yet more evidence of
the vitality and promise of blockchain technologies and their role in
securing better governance and better lives for all of us. There is no single correct path to human flourishing. There are many paths, although
we believe they all run through some form of decentralised blockchain
technology.

14.2 Durable, corruption-resistant, transparent archives
In Chapter 5, we discussed at length the importance of secure archives
for human governance. As we saw, archives preserve the history of
government decisions, of property ownership, of culture and of relations with other communities. Indeed, as we saw, it is arguable that the
archive comes before the community and the state, or in any case, that
the community and state cannot exist without the archive. Furthermore, if a state or community cannot reliably maintain records of its
actions, then it undermines the ability of its members to know if they
should exit because the community administration no longer conforms
to their values. Similarly, if the records are not accessible, community
members lose the ability to understand the relations their community
has entered into, the actions it has taken and, again, whether it is conforming to community values.
Just as we saw that archives are very important, they are also very
vulnerable. As we have seen in this book, in the past, they have been
destroyed by revolutionaries, drug lords, conquistadors, counterrevolutionaries, invading armies, earthquakes and fires. They can also be
lost, corrupted with bad data, hidden and otherwise made inaccessible


(or incriminating parts can be made inaccessible). So, the issue is that
for any sort of community, and certainly for blockchain communities
and cyberstates, we desperately need some way to make such archives
secure, incorruptible and accessible.
The solution that we alluded to in Chapter 5 was to deploy decentralised archives that would be Byzantine fault tolerant. The idea is that
there will not be a single point of failure; one would have to take down
a vast portion of the network to destroy the archive. Nodes in the network could be targeted, but the network could survive such attacks. Of
course, that is a very general claim. It is time to go into more detail.
There are certainly many available options for distributed archives,
including decentralised storage networks such as the InterPlanetary
File System or IPFS (which is connected to the cryptocurrency Filecoin), Storj, Arweave and Sia. Some of these efforts have very good
ideas for which we will advocate. To date, however, none of them offer
a complete package of desirables.
Let us begin with some of the limits that a decentralised file service
might run into. One problem, of course, is that nodes within a network
are of varying quality. We are talking about hardware here, and hardware failures happen often, without warning, and it sometimes seems
that they happen at the worst possible times. One solution to the problem is to replicate the data at multiple locations in the network as often
as possible. On one extreme, this would mean reproducing everything
at every node. However, this strategy is wildly inefficient, and it has a
centralising effect in that only very large-capacity nodes can hold all
the information relevant to the conduct of, for example, a cyberstate.
The network would consist of a handful of nodes that had the ability to
supply Amazon or Google levels of data storage.
You might think that we could get by with less redundancy if we can
quickly repair a failure in the network. For example, a network in which
two copies of every piece of data exist might be viable if you could repair
the information loss the second a node went down. You would have to
rebuild the redundancy as soon as you lost it. The problem is that two


nodes that happen to have the same information might collapse at the
same time. There is also the problem that constantly pinging nodes to
see if they are online and available has a computational cost of its own.
Therefore, the solution seems to be that we want more redundancy
than two copies of the information. However, whether the solution is
to create three or ten or one thousand copies depends on two things:
how quickly you need to identify the data loss, and how quickly you
need to repair it.
There is also an additional problem here, which is that just because
a node is supposed to have a certain piece of information does not mean
that it does. A node in the network might claim to be keeping a piece
of information safe in order to receive incentives of some form (i.e.
payment), but it might be acting dishonestly. Thus, we need to assure
ourselves that the nodes actually have the information they are supposed to. This will generate difficulties when the information that the
node is supposed to hold is confidential – medical records, for example.
Therefore, we want to know that they have the relevant information
without having to see the data itself.
Another concern is the issue of how incentives are supposed to
work. Obviously, a distributed archive only works if people support the
network and maintain the nodes that they are supposed to, but if the
incentive structure is suboptimal, we might find that the incentives are
only appealing (or mostly appealing) to very large data centres. This
would have the effect of centralising the network all over again.
Therefore, there are many potential issues, and we are not the first
to worry about these matters. Let us discuss some of these concerns and
connect them with previous attempts to allay them.
Earlier, we stated that we do not want (actually, cannot have) a distributed network with a huge number of redundancies. There has to be
some redundancy, of course, but critically, we also have to know when
there is a data retention failure. To put it another way, you have to repair
data loss in the network, but before you can do that, you have to know
that the data has been lost.


One solution, adopted by the Codex decentralised file storage protocol developed by the Institute of Free Technology, relies on ‘erasure
coding’. ‘Erasure coding’ builds upon an old idea known as ‘Reed-Solomon codes’, which were developed by Irving S. Reed and Gustave
Solomon, staff members of MIT Lincoln Laboratory, in 1960. Their
seminal article was titled ‘Polynomial Codes Over Certain Finite
Fields’, and their idea ended up having many applications over the
years, most notably in compact disks.1
The basic idea is this: to find out if a given piece of data has gone
missing, you do not want to have to keep looking for the data itself
or its absence. It is far more efficient to sprinkle some tracking information into the data – markers for the relevant data, if you will. For
example, a given block of medical data might come with a code. You do
not search for the medical data itself. You just search for the marker. If
you ping a node for the marker and get no response, you have reason to
believe that the data has gone missing, at least temporarily. Maybe the
node has gone down. Or maybe bit rot has corrupted the medium of
memory. It does not matter what happened; you just need to know that
the information might have gone missing.
Of course, this only actually works if the node being pinged is a
good citizen and is not trying to deceive you, for it is possible to dump
the data that is supposed to be preserved and keep the relevant tracking
marker. Some sort of auditing mechanism is required.
While erasure coding supports data loss detection, this alone may
not be enough in Byzantine decentralised systems. Malicious nodes
might try to implement a wide range of strategies to pretend they
are storing information. Why would they do this? Maybe they are
trying to cut costs and want to reduce expenditure on storage and
bandwidth, but at the same time, they want to receive payment for
Irving S. Reed and Gustave Solomon, ‘Polynomial Codes Over Certain Finite Fields’,
Journal of the Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, 8/2 (1960), 300–304 <https://
www.jstor.org/stable/2098968> [accessed 16 January 2024].


data storage. Or maybe they are politically malicious and are part of
a plot to disappear important cultural or legal information across the
network. We need to occasionally probe or audit the information that
was allegedly held.
This is a well-studied problem in the academic literature, and it
goes by names such as ‘proof of custody’ and ‘proof of space-time’,
among others. Most of the existing solutions rely on a frequent random
sampling of data blocks across the whole dataset. During this process,
storage nodes have to provide clear evidence that they are in possession
of the data they say they hold.
These mechanisms are widely understood today, and for the most
part, they do the job they are supposed to do, but with a couple of caveats. First, there is an issue of efficiency. There is a huge computational
cost to conducting data audits – going through the data line by line.
Then, for decentralised archives, there is the problem of what you are
going to compare that data against to see if it is accurate. You cannot
use a centralised register of information because then you have a centralised solution to the problem – the ‘official’ record has become centralised and thus becomes an immediate point of vulnerability. Beyond
this, there is the issue discussed earlier in this section, which is that
sometimes the information you are auditing is private. Take the example of medical records (or state secrets or whatever you like). You would
like to pass the audit without releasing the information being stored to
the auditor.
Codex and other distributed databases leverage zero-knowledge
proofs to prove the possession of information. Given that we have
mentioned zero-knowledge proofs multiple times without much in the
way of elaboration, let us now provide more detail about these groundbreaking cryptographic protocols.
At its most abstract level, a zero-knowledge proof is simply a way of
proving you have certain information or a certain ability without giving
that information away or without exercising the ability. Note that this
is stronger than simply supplying a marker or code as evidence that the


data is held. This is much closer to a mathematical proof that you hold
the relevant data.
Suppose that we have a computer program that we want to sell
to you – let us say an image analysis program that can identify buried
treasure (yes, this is a completely fictional example, but stay with us).
You want us to show you that the program works, so you ask us to run it
to demonstrate its capabilities. Sneakily, during our demonstration, we
run the very computation that you want to have performed; the demo
itself will reveal the location of the buried treasure. One solution is to
carry out demonstrations in other domains, but you might argue that
no test is really reliable unless you can see that it functions as promised
in the domain in which you intend to use it. What are we to do about
your demands for proof of ability?
This is where zero-knowledge proofs come in. Let us say we want
to prove to you that our program can do what we say it can without
giving away the thing of value (let us say we are selling a program to
perform some task). We can do this in the following way. We provide
a proof that anyone who can do the task you have in mind, let us call
it Task 0 – a computation of some kind – can do this only if they can
perform a certain logically related task (possibly including a collection
of subtasks). Let us call this Task 1. To reiterate, Task 1 and Task 0 are
related mathematically; in terms of computer science, Task 1 is reducible to Task 0. The proof relies on a challenge to see that the individual
can perform Task 1. Since performing Task 1 implies the ability to perform Task 0, then we can (with reasonable probability) assume that
the individual has done (or can do) Task 0. Keep in mind that Task 0
is the task you are interested in. It is the one for which you are ready
to pay. The other task is not worth anything to you per se, beyond the
fact that it establishes that we can carry out Task 0. You can ask us to
carry out enough of these computationally related tasks so that you are
satisfied that our program can do what we claim it can. In effect, you
issue a series of challenges to us in order to prove that our program can
perform the tasks we claim it does.


Zero-knowledge proofs come in many forms. We are inclined to
favour succinct non-interactive arguments of knowledge – better known
as ‘zk-SNARKs’. The concept of SNARK-type proofs has been in the
literature for several years, and they have also been implemented by
protocols such as Zcash and the zero-knowledge rollups (ZK-rollups)
used by the Ethereum protocol in so-called ‘layer-two applications’
(for example, protocols like Polygon zkEVM). Here, we can think of
a layer-two protocol as a separate blockchain that performs operations
rapidly but uses a more decentralised layer-one protocol like Ethereum
as its secure settlement layer.
The key difference between a zk-SNARK and a standard zeroknowledge proof procedure (like we used to verify our fictional treasure-hunting software) is that the zk-SNARK is, as the name suggests,
non-interactive. This means that you do not need to issue a series of
challenges to inductively establish the proof of knowledge. The idea is
that a common reference string that both the prover and verifier share
is sufficient to achieve computational zero-knowledge without requiring interactions.2 The non-interactive nature of the proof also removes
the necessity of direct communication between the proving party and
the validating party. This means that anyone can take a zk-SNARK
proof and validate it with the same level of confidence that any other
party has. This would be particularly helpful to independent third parties that might suspect the proving party and the validator are colluding. Finally, non-interactive proof procedures are particularly useful in
the case of blockchain protocols, as constant interactive queries would
be computationally expensive.
A moment ago, we mentioned the ZK-rollups that are used
by Ethereum layer-two protocols, and these are useful as well, for
they offer proofs of the validity of batches of transactions instead of
Manuel Blum, Paul Feldman and Silvio Micali, ‘Non-Interactive Zero-Knowledge and Its
Applications’, in Proceedings of the Twentieth Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing (Chicago, IL, 1988), 103–12 <http://portal.acm.org/citation.cfm?doid=62212.62222>
[accessed 30 October 2024].


transaction-by-transaction proofs. This can be beneficial if we want to
query multiple databases for proof of possession of certain data without
requiring proof of every single query. Batched queries are more efficient.
So far, we have been talking about failure detection, and we have
argued that data loss can be detected in several ways. We can detect
benign data loss through erasure coding, and we can detect malicious
data loss through remote auditing using zk-SNARKs. However, it is
not enough to simply detect the missing or corrupted data. There is also
the question of what you are going to do about it. Data loss needs to be
repaired, but it needs to be repaired efficiently.
One thought would be that as soon as you detect a loss of data,
you should immediately repair it, but this turns out to be an inefficient
solution. Usually, when a node goes down, it is a temporary problem,
such as a power loss or required maintenance. Rather than engage in
a computationally costly and potentially unnecessary repair process
immediately, it would be better to wait to see if the node comes online
again with the data intact.
That said, nodes do go offline permanently and data degrades for
any number of reasons. We believe a strategy known as ‘lazy repair’ is
best positioned to balance these concerns. The basic idea is that you
can tolerate data loss for a while because you have enough redundancy
in your system, but when that data loss crosses a certain threshold, you
must initiate repairs and restore the system’s necessary redundancies.
Codex, for example, implements a strategy that starts with an idea
from the previously mentioned Reed and Solomon work – in particular, a strong Reed-Solomon algorithm in which multiple data blocks
from a dataset can be lost before the dataset becomes irretrievable.
This means that the network can tolerate multiple missing blocks and
still be able to reconstruct the whole dataset quickly. This allows us
to implement a bandwidth-efficient, ‘lazy’ recovery technique like that
just described. The basic idea is that when your redundancy falls below
a certain threshold, you execute the repair strategy. For example, where
seven copies are routinely maintained, one might tolerate a loss down


to four copies, after which the creation of additional blocks is triggered. This strategy saves the network from a constant desperate churn
to repair every single piece of missing data.
Where does this leave us? The thought is that we can use a basket
of existing technologies to not merely identify and repair data loss in
the network but also to identify those losses and repair them in the
most efficient way possible. It will not matter if those losses of data are
accidental or caused by a malicious actor, we will be able to audit the
data and repair it as necessary.
All of this leads to an important question: Who conducts and pays
for all this work, and how are they incentivised? The answer, of course,
is that the network itself has to carry out these activities, which need to
be hard coded into the design of the network. The incentives are those
we have discussed throughout this book in terms of the value of having
secure archives. The costs are borne by whomever happens to participate in the network. It is not a cost that is felt directly by network members, although perhaps indirectly in terms of greater transaction fees.
However, in addition to the general role of the network in securing
the archives, individual nodes have to do their part, too – nodes that
need to be incentivised (in addition to time commitments, there are
hardware and electricity expenses associated with running a node). Few
people are going to run a node on a distributed network without some
sort of compensation. Hypothetically, a network could demand that its
members carry their weight by maintaining archival nodes, but another
possibility is to incentivise people to run nodes by paying them through
a system of rewards.
This leads to the last big issue regarding archives: What does the
incentive structure look like? This is not a trivial issue at all because
we want the incentives for nodes to be designed so that they help the
network grow in desirable ways. As we noted earlier, a poorly designed
incentive structure might simply pay the most money to those node
operators storing the most data. However, this leads to giant data
repositories and something that looks a lot like the centralised Internet


we see today, with powerhouses like Amazon maintaining giant server
farms. This, in turn, gives them a kill switch to shut down many protocols should they choose to do so or be asked to do so by nation states
and other powers. What is the solution?
One idea is to structure the incentives so that they are very high for
smaller stores of data and that they diminish as the set of stored data
increases in size. There can be further incentives for data that is not
widely replicated within the system or for data that is prioritised for
some reason (medical records come to mind).
Now clearly, this strategy sacrifices some efficiency for more decentralisation. However, such a sacrifice is well worth it for all the reasons
addressed in this book. Decentralisation leads to many goods, including
securing communities against corruption – a phenomenon with astronomical costs. Another way to put the point is that forsaking decentralisation to save a small amount of financial resources is penny wise
and pound foolish.

14.3 Decentralised, secure communications
Effective states and communities need not only secure and transparent
(when appropriate) archives but also private rails upon which their community members can communicate. Community members may wish to
communicate with each other about business strategies or inventions or
ideas for new technologies. They accordingly need to know that their
communications on these matters are secure.
However, communities also need to have a secure means of communication to discuss political matters. The fact that blockchain communities and cyberstates find people to be largely politically aligned
does not mean that no important political disputes arise. People need
to be able to discuss these in private until they feel ready to go public
with their ideas.
There is, obviously, an interesting asymmetry here in that the
state itself should have open and transparent communications while


individuals need private and secure communications. Persons in state
positions will have access to private communications protocols, and
these can be abused for purposes of state business. This is a problem we
will return to but in the meantime, for us to even begin this discussion,
we need to talk about secure communications.
You might think that we have secure communications now, and to
some extent, we do. However, there are important limitations in the
current system of communication networks and communication technologies. Much of the infrastructure for encrypted communications is
highly centralised, with all of the dangers that this entails. For example,
while we can communicate using Pretty Good Privacy (PGP), and
while this affords us the protection of military-grade encryption, there
are points of failure. The key server, for example, is housed in a centralised location. Our existing communications network can refuse to carry
encrypted communications. Or they can refuse to carry encrypted communications from a particular source. Furthermore, although we can
use encrypted communication protocols, it is still possible for others to
know that we are the ones communicating.
It is worth reflecting on why this is important. Sometimes, the meta
information of who is talking to whom is even more important than
what they are talking about. A lot can be extracted from this metadata.
There is the network of people communicating, the time they are communicating, a reasonably good idea of the amount of information they
are communicating and one can determine who is at the centre of the
group of people communicating – the hub, as it were. This is an issue for
any sort of communication of political strategy, but it is also an issue for
business dealings. Business leaders might wish to communicate about a
potential merger without signalling that they are communicating with
each other.
Therefore, there are many issues to contend with. Perhaps the biggest of them involves the possibility of nodes being restrictive about the
information that they let pass. Should nodes have the ability to censor


the flow of information through the network? One would hope not,
although censorship in decentralised nodes is not at all unheard of.3
Of course, we have technologies that allow us to encrypt our
communications, so the problem is not that someone might read our
communications and then censor them. The problem is that someone
might censor our communications based on their origin or destination.
Someone might choose to censor nodes that originate in right-wing
or left-wing or politically agnostic communities. Or they might censor communications that are addressed to such communities. Or they
might choose to censor communications of a certain size because they
indicate a certain degree of interest in contemporaneous political events.
Can nodes do that? Sure, they can do it now because communications
must propagate through the network, and this means that each node in
the network is responsible for passing packets of communicated data
around the network.
Fortunately, protocols like Waku – developed by the Institute of
Free Technology – address these problems. The desideratum is to find
a strategy in which network nodes pass communications while being
blind not just to the content but also to the source, the destination and
the amount of information. How can we do this?
The central idea behind Waku is that packets of information passed
through the communications network are encapsulated in a way that
does not reveal content or a known author or recipient. The nodes must
simply pass the encapsulated information on. But how do we obscure
the metadata?
The metadata can be blurred in several ways. First, to disguise the
amount of information being sent, short messages can be filled with
For example, Bitcoin developer Luke Dashjr (Luke-jr) has advocated that Bitcoin transactions involving ‘ordinals’ be censored. See Frederick Munawa, ‘Among Bitcoin Developers,
Debate Is Raging Over Whether to Censor Ordinals BRC-20s’, CoinDesk, 5 December
2023 <https://www.coindesk.com/tech/2023/05/12/among-bitcoin-developers-debate-israging-over-whether-to-censor-ordinals-brc-20s/> [accessed 30 October 2024].


additional junk information. Large messages can be broken into packets. All of these messages will not be routed directly from point A to
point B but rather will be routed randomly through the network in a
way that is blind to their ultimate destination. All a node needs to know
is if a particular capsule is for that particular node. It can ping it using
zero-knowledge proofs. If it is for them, the capsule will verify this; if
it is not, the capsule will not verify ownership, and it will be passed on
to other nodes.
Now clearly, we want the transfer of information to be efficient
despite all this, and one of the key ways to achieve this is to organise
the network along the lines of a scale-free network. Such networks
are designed with several densely integrated hubs connected to many
local nodes but also connected to other centralised hubs. Scale-free
networks like this are familiar in nature – the human brain and airline
flight networks being cases in point. For example, most airlines have
a handful of centralised hubs, each of which is densely connected to
regional airports. This sort of network (explained by Duncan J. Watts
in his book Small Worlds) gives rise to the ‘six degrees of separation’
phenomenon. Such networks not only seem to emerge from natural
phenomena and human activity but are wildly efficient from a mathematical point of view.4
Therefore, we can think of a communications network for a blockchain community as having this sort of organising principle, with communications encapsulated and passed throughout the network quite
rapidly thanks to heavily interconnected hubs and with the metadata
obscured thanks to the sender being known only to the addressee and
the addressee only known to the sender. Even the amount of information within the capsule will also be unknown, as small batches of
information can be sent with junk information, and large batches of
Duncan J. Watts, Small Worlds: The Dynamics of Networks Between Order and Randomness
(Princeton, NJ, 2003).


information will be split up randomly. The idea would be to have each
capsule contain precisely the same number of bits of information.
At the end of the day, this strategy, as embodied in Waku, provides
a private and secure means for network citizens to communicate with
each other while obscuring who is communicating with whom, how
much is being communicated and, if we wish, obscuring the time of
communication as well. Most importantly, there will be no opportunity
for nodes in the network to censor the information they are passing
along, as they will have no idea what its content is, who its sender is or
who its receiver is.

14.4 Cryptocurrencies and sound monetary policy
We can hardly conclude this chapter without saying something about
cryptocurrencies. We have avoided talking about cryptocurrencies
throughout this book (except to use them as illustrations) because we
want to highlight newer applications for blockchain technologies – in
particular, those applications that support decentralised governance.
However, cryptocurrencies are, of course, not peripheral to this project.
They are essential to any attempt to provide decentralised-yet-cooperative human governance.
This should not be surprising. It would be foolish to offer a platform
for decentralised governance and not apply it to currencies. Traditional
fiat currencies and traditional finance have all the drawbacks that we
have discussed throughout this book – they offer up centralised points
of failure, are vectors for attack and are magnets for corruption. And,
let us be real: any account of human governance that avoided the fiscal
sector of human governance would hardly be taken seriously. Managing monetary policy and regulating the financial sector is one of the
principal elements of governance today and has been a central element
of governance for millennia.


The fundamental question here is not whether decentralised-yetcooperative governance should avail itself of cryptocurrencies, but rather
what form of cryptocurrencies should be utilised. We can sharpen that
question in the following way: Should blockchain communities utilise
off-the-shelf, globally recognised cryptocurrencies like BTC and ETH,
or should individual communities mint their own tokens with which to
carry out their business? The answer is: Why not both?
In the first place, it would be foolish for any blockchain community not to allow the usage of core cryptocurrencies like BTC and
ETH. They, at least as of this writing, are monetarily sound; BTC
will eventually reach its hard-capped supply limit of 21 million coins,
and as we write this, ETH is sometimes already deflationary – more
ETH is burned in a transaction than minted as staking rewards.5 Furthermore, the more widely the currency is circulated and the more
widely decentralised a cryptocurrency network, the safer it is. We have
already discussed the monumental amount of resources it would take
to initiate a successful attack against either of these networks. One
would either have to acquire massive amounts of mining resources (in
the case of BTC) or stake a massive amount of ETH. Plus, the nodes
for both protocols are already widely scattered around the globe.
Given these advantages, why would one opt for a community-specific
cryptocurrency?
There is utility to having individual blockchain communities issue
their own cryptocurrencies. In doing so, the community is maintaining
its own ledger and recording value that is inherent in the operation of
the community. Such cryptocurrencies might be used to measure stake
in a DAO or they might be used to reward people making contributions to the community or they might be used to carry out business
that is of interest to the community in a cost-efficient way. Thousands
of web3 protocols have issued their own tokens for these and other

<https://beaconcha.in/burn> [accessed 30 October 2024].


reasons. Doing so is fairly simple, and as the protocol grows, such issuance can give rise to the accumulation of wealth by holders within the
community.
The problem with a community-issued cryptocurrency is that if
the community is smaller, it means the value of the network will be
less and a 51% attack of the type discussed in the previous chapter is
always a possibility. Is there a way to enjoy the community-specific
features of a community-based cryptocurrency while simultaneously
preserving the security and safety provided by coins like BTC and
ETH? Certainly. The trick is to anchor the community-based cryptocurrency in the more decentralised global coins, using the latter as a
kind of settlement layer.
There are many ways to ground a community-based cryptocurrency in a protocol like Ethereum, for example, by issuing the community-based cryptocurrency as a layer-two coin – something analogous
to coins like Polygon’s POL and Arbitrum’s ARB, albeit presumably
smaller in scope. In any case, one idea would be to issue the coin as a
kind of ZK-rollup of the form we discussed earlier in this chapter.
Here is the idea. Let us say that our blockchain community issues
a layer-two coin called Community, or CMTY for short. That, in
effect, means that we have a layer-two ledger that carries out computations, records information, and keeps track of transactions and
who owns what for our community. However, if it is a ZK-rollup,
we can also do two other things. Firstly, we can use zero-knowledge
proofs to prove that the transactions are being carried out according to some specified set of rules. Secondly, we can assemble those
layer-two transactions into batches and, periodically, permanently
record the history of those transactions on the layer-one network – in
this case, on the Ethereum blockchain. Thus, we get the best of both
worlds. We get a ledger, smart contracts and so on that are dedicated
to our community and its interests, and we can offer proof that those
transactions and computations are valid. However, we can anchor the


results of those transactions on the Ethereum blockchain and benefit
from that blockchain’s robust security, which is, in part, a product of
its global node distribution.
A related strategy is to borrow from the Eigenlayer protocol and
‘restake’ ETH into the new token. Staying with our example of CMTY,
this means that one first stakes one’s ETH in a protocol like the liquid
staking service Lido, yielding stETH, which represents staked ETH.
In doing so, you have staked your ETH to help secure the network
and will earn financial rewards for doing so, but now you have a token
– stETH – that is tremendously valuable. One could then take that
stETH and restake it as the security layer for CMTY. In this way, it
would be extremely costly to try to seize control of the CMTY network.
There would be real losses if the staked assets had to be surrendered as
a result of penalties levied against such bad actors.
If that sounds too good to be true, we must confess that there are
limitations to this strategy. In the next chapter, we will see that there are
conceptual limits to decentralisation, and layer-two protocols certainly
reveal points of centralisation. The first problem begins with bridging
information and cryptocurrencies from layer one to layer two. As we
write this, there are no established decentralised cross-chain bridging
solutions. Beyond this, layer-two protocols often operate on a single or
a small number of dedicated servers. This means that even though we
can monitor the operations and query for proof of their validity, if those
transactions take place on a single server or a small number of servers, there are points of physical attack. Now, perhaps these difficulties
can be overcome with layer-two redundancies, but this would lead to
sacrificing the efficiency that we come to expect from layer-two protocols (if you have carried out transactions on Polygon or Arbitrum, you
know how much faster and cheaper they were than similar transactions
on Ethereum). Our point here is not that there are no solutions but
simply that there are tradeoffs to any solution – security for efficiency,
for example.


We could continue delving into technical issues, but you probably
already grasp our central point. There are technologies that are already
well understood and some newer ones that can be combined in different ways to pursue the goals that we outlined in the first thirteen
chapters of this book. Because there are conceptual limits to what we
can accomplish, and because there will be tradeoffs in any strategy we
pursue, it would be foolhardy to say that there is one single best strategy
that we should follow exclusively. Indeed, different blockchain communities will doubtless settle on different technology stacks.
Acknowledging that there is no single best approach to blockchain
technologies, we can still offer tools that we feel are optimal for building such communities. In this chapter, we have already mentioned
Codex and Waku and, previously, Status. However, there is one piece
of the technology stack that we have not mentioned yet – Nomos. We
have waited this long to introduce Nomos because, at its core, Nomos
is what this book is about. Nomos is a layer-one blockchain that is
optimised for human governance. It is a platform designed to help us
build blockchain communities that meet the desiderata that we have
discussed in this book.
We encourage readers to explore and apply these technologies,
adjusting them as necessary and adapting them to their needs. You
may have entirely different ideas about how to proceed, but that is also
completely fine. We are not merely advocates of decentralisation for
finance and governance but for the enterprise of building out new technologies as well. As we stated earlier, there is no best way to proceed
here, and if there is, we certainly do not know which way that would
be – no one does.
You can learn more about the elements of the technology stack we
prefer at the following websites: Codex (https://codex.storage/), Waku
(https://waku.org/), Nomos (https://nomos.tech/) and Status (https://
status.app/). Those interested in these technologies and the principles
behind them may also find value in the rest of the Institute of Free


Technology’s portfolio (https://free.technology/). Feel free to use these
technologies or ignore them as you see fit.
There are some additional issues that we need to address. These
recommended technologies, like any technologies, do not operate in
isolation. They are technologies designed to be used by humans but by
humans that hold certain values. Nothing works if we are not successfully aligned with our technologies, or perhaps, it would be better to
say if they are not aligned with us. However, there are other conceptual
issues that we also need to address – for example, whether anything can
truly be trustless and whether anything can be truly decentralised. We
turn to these fascinating conceptual issues in the next chapter.
