CHAPTER 2

NATION STATES ARE OBSOLETE
GOVERNANCE TECHNOLOGIES
2.1 Preliminaries

I

n 1994, during the Rwandan genocide, Immaculée Ilibagiza, a member of the Tutsi tribe, hid in a secret space in her pastor’s house,
listening to Hutu tribesmen who were armed with machetes as they
searched for her. She heard them say that they needed to terminate the
Tutsi ‘cockroaches’, and then, ‘“She’s here . . . we know she’s here somewhere. Find her – find Immaculée.”’
Immaculée heard one of the Hutus brag that he had killed 399
cockroaches and wanted her to bring his record to an even 400. In her
book Left to Tell, Immaculée described the experience:
I tried to swallow, but my throat closed up. I had no saliva, and
my mouth was drier than sand. I closed my eyes and tried to
make myself disappear, but their voices grew louder. I knew
that they would show no mercy, and my mind echoed with one
thought: If they catch me, they will kill me. If they catch me, they
will kill me. If they catch me, they will kill me.1
Immaculée Ilibagiza and Steve Erwin, Left to Tell: Discovering God Amidst the Rwandan
Holocaust (Carlsbad, CA, 2006).


When Immaculée finally left her hiding spot three months later,
she learned about the damage that had been done to her family and
tribe. Her father, her mother and two of her three brothers had been
butchered. Uncounted neighbours perished as well. The estimates of
her Tutsi tribespeople that had been killed ranged from half a million
to a million.2 The number of Tutsi women raped ranged from 200,000
to a quarter of a million.3 The psychological damage done to survivors
was incalculable.
In the wake of this atrocity, it was natural to talk about the evil
of the Hutu murderers, and to be sure, the murderers cannot and
should not be absolved. However, it also needs to be observed that
these events may not have happened at all had two different tribes
with diverse cultures and histories not been kettled together within
the boundaries of a single nation state, with those boundaries drawn
by colonial European powers.
Indeed, once kettled, the question became which of the two tribes
would rule the other. When Germany controlled Rwanda, the minority Tutsi were placed in power, with consequences that set in motion
a deep resentment that festered up to and through the horrific genocide of 1994. To put it another way, whatever the benefits to Europe
that accrued from the Peace of Westphalia, the attempt to impose this
political technology on Africa, ignoring tribal boundaries and creating
new and artificial nation-state boundaries, has been disastrous.
Sadly, the Rwandan story is not unique. Even today, our political
landscape is full of examples of ethnic groups forced to live together
within nation states, with one group lording power over the other
and, all too often, resulting in attempted genocide. Modern states are,
as we write, the settings for numerous examples. The victims include
the Rohingya in Myanmar, the Nuer in South Sudan, Christians and
Luc Reydams, ‘“More than a Million”: The Politics of Accounting for the Dead of the
Rwandan Genocide’, Review of African Political Economy, 48/168 (2021), 168–256.
Gérard Prunier, The Rwanda Crisis, 1959–1994: History of a Genocide, 1st ed. (London,
1998).


Yazidis in Iraq and Syria, Christians and Muslims in the Central African Republic, Darfuris in Sudan, and the list goes on.
Even when people are not dying on a genocidal scale, rights are
often trampled upon in nation states. If inhabitants have diverse values,
and someone is in charge of enforcing one set of values, then someone’s
interests are being protected and someone else’s are not. Thus, the result
for nation states like the United States is what the media calls ‘culture
wars’ – conflicts that generate lots of existential anguish and a few hate
crimes and murders, but no mass killings. At least, not yet.
You might be thinking that all these examples of genocide and
repression are indeed terrible, but are not nation states the only viable
option? Is there not an alternative system of government that can avoid
such outcomes or that can at least allow people to safely escape such
situations when they implode? What is the alternative to nation states?

2.2 Nation states are not the only option
Sometimes, it seems that nation states have been with us forever. Before
the United Nations, after all, there was the League of Nations, and
before that, there were surely nations, no? But while nations and, in
particular, nation states seem to be set in stone in our world today, it
was not always so.
Indeed, it was not so long ago that people used alternative systems
to organise themselves for political and economic purposes. There have
been kingdoms and city states, empires and duchies, federations of city
states, caliphates, palatinates, papal states, clans, tribes, and ‘nations’
of people sharing common heritage but not yet organised into states.
Indeed, until the arrival of European powers, the entire continent of
North America was principally organised into tribes, with occasional
empires rising up and then fading away.4
Felipe Fernandez-Armesto, Before Columbus: Exploration and Colonization from the Mediterranean to the Atlantic, 1229-1492 (Philadelphia, PA, 1987).


The fact is that nation states are relatively recent inventions. They
are a form of government that has its roots in the Protestant–Catholic
wars that swept through Northern Europe after the Reformation and a
form of government designed to solve a very particular problem: How
do we contain conflicts over religion and ideology that might otherwise
sweep across continents consuming everything in their path?
As we noted in Chapter 1, nation states as we know them were
born in 1648 with the aforementioned Peace of Westphalia – the treaties that marked the end of the Thirty Years’ War. Leo Gross, writing in
the American Journal of International Law on the 300th anniversary of
the Peace (shortly after the founding of the United Nations), described
the Peace of Westphalia as ‘the majestic portal which leads from the
old into the new world.’5 According to the standard view, the Peace
of Westphalia secured peace by establishing the convention that we
should not look too closely at what goes on within national boundaries. National boundaries could thus serve as bulkheads against waves of
violence that might otherwise sweep across continents.
Fifty-six years later, Henry Kissinger echoed this take in his book,
World Order:
The Peace of Westphalia became a turning point in the history
of nations because the elements it set in place were as uncomplicated as they were sweeping. The state, not the empire, dynasty,
or religious confession was affirmed as the building block of
European order. The concept of state sovereignty was established. The right of each signatory to choose its own domestic
structure and religious orientation free from intervention was
affirmed, while novel clauses ensured that minority sects could
practice their faith in peace and be free. Beyond the immediate
Leo Gross, ‘The Peace of Westphalia, 1648–1948’, American Journal of International Law,
42/1 (1948), 20–41 <https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/american-journal-of-international-law/article/abs/peace-of-westphalia-16481948/80489D3C080D4CDD97C7E
DC0354DC37F> [accessed 29 April 2023].


demands of the moment, the principles of a system of ‘international relations’ were taking shape, motivated by the common
desire to avoid a recurrence of total war on the Continent.6
Not everyone buys this interpretation of the Peace of Westphalia, and some have dubbed Leo Gross ‘the Homer of the Westphalia
myth’,7 but the critics are not so much troubled by the thought that
nation states are inventions as they are with the concern that Gross
was attempting to canonise the legitimacy of nation states by giving
them a date of birth and connecting them with important international
accords. Cormac Shine, writing in History Today, complained that the
Westphalia myth is designed to ‘make the formation of the existing
settlement seem inevitable. Any alternatives outside the realm of sovereign states are discounted.’8
Similarly, in this book, our idea is that we should not think of
nation states as inevitable or necessary. They are human inventions and,
perhaps, not particularly good ones, despite their canonisation in international law. Two things should be kept in mind here. First, if the idea
of nation states was to have a system of human political organisation
that avoided wars of religion and ideology sweeping across continents
(or the globe, for that matter), they have not been all that successful.
The second thing is that sometimes nation states make the problem
worse by kettling persons of diverse interests and backgrounds within
artificial borders, where one group typically dominates the other (leading to extreme examples like the Rwandan genocide).
As we stated, it was not always like this. Tribes of people came into
conflict with each other, to be sure, but they were not typically locked
together within artificial territorial boundaries and told to choose which
Henry Kissinger, World Order (New York, NY, 2015).
Jeremy Larkins, From Hierarchy to Anarchy: Territory and Politics Before Westphalia (New
York, NY, 2009).
Cormac Shine, ‘Treaties and Turning Points: The Thirty Years’ War’, History Today, February 2016 <https://www.historytoday.com/treaties-and-turning-points-thirty-years-war>
[accessed 28 April 2023].


set of interests would dominate that shared territory. A tribe might be
forced out of a territory as, for example, when the Lakota forced the
Cheyenne out of the Black Hills before Europeans arrived there, but
the Cheyenne were still self-governing and still controlled their values,
even if they were displaced from their previous territory.9
Here lies the problem: when persons of conflicting religions and
ideologies are locked into the same space and forced to work things
out, compromise is possible, but more likely, someone is going to be
the loser. Maybe a strongman like Saddam Hussein will resolve the
conflict between Sunnis and Shiites by dictatorial decree and military
suppression of one group. Or maybe a government, like that of the
Soviet Union, will outlaw all religious beliefs or at least create obstacles
for believers. Or maybe an election will be held in which the larger
group will prevail, leading to the minority group’s values being disregarded. But whether the system of governance is democratic or dictatorial, there always seem to be winners and losers, and because there are
losers, there is typically also a group of people that are left resentful and
angry, even if not yet physically harmed.
One way to take this point is that we are trying to solve new problems today – not just the problems that drove the solution in the Peace
of Westphalia. To be sure, we are still dealing with the ideological differences of the time, but their culture wars are not the same as ours
today. And while the problems faced in Northern Europe in 1648
were arguably worse than those we face today in the West, we still face
problems that call for solutions. It is not enough to kettle communities
together and tell them to deal with it. What we are looking for are solutions that minimise distrust, allow communities to be self-determining
and provide safe exit if necessary.
Often housing groups of people with radically different interests
and goals and values, nation states are odd by their very nature. However, they are also odd in how they operate externally. Nation states do

James R. Walker, Lakota Society (Lincoln, NE, 1992).


go to war. They do it all the time. And while tribes also went to war,
when a nation state engages in kinetic conflict, it is really something to
behold. Because some nation states are drawn with borders that have
enormous territories and numbers of people, they typically also have
vast resources to wage wars – wars in which weaker nations are turned
into economic vassals. When large nation states find themselves in conflict with their peers, the result (as seen in those wars of the twentieth
century) is typically the deaths of tens of millions of people.
Indeed, some thinkers, like the conservative French philosopher
and political theorist Bertrand de Jouvenel, have argued that nation
states are, by their very nature, inevitable engines of violence and repression. Having fought in the resistance during World War II, he had seen
more than enough warfare and observed that the modern nation state
had become a meat grinder in its execution of warfare. When nation
states went to war, Jouvenel argued, ‘national resources’ became targets.
‘In this war everyone – workmen, peasants, and women alike – is in the
fight, and in consequence everything, the factory, the harvest, even the
dwelling-house, has turned target. As a result, the enemy to be fought
has been all flesh that is and all soil, and the bombing plane has striven
to consummate the utter destruction of them all.’ As he put it, ‘the
whole nation becomes a weapon of war wielded by the state.’10
In Jouvenel’s view, this sort of violence could not have happened in
the pre-Westphalian age. Back then, kings might go to war, but they
would need to tax and enlist the support of nobles, who often refused
their support. However, in the new age, there were no such checks on
a leader. In the age of nation states, wars simply became too easy to
execute, and economic resources were rarely, if ever, denied.
The curious thing is that while political discourse can go on and on
about the best system of government for nation states – the best way to
organise democracy or theocracy or whichever alternative – and we can
argue about which nation states are behaving well and which are part

Bertrand de Jouvenel, On Power: The Natural History of Its Growth (Carmel, IN, 1993).


of the ‘axis of evil’, we seldom ask ourselves why we need nation states
at all. Are they even a good idea?
Let us set aside the issue of whether nation states prevent or actually contribute to genocides and other atrocities. Are they even that
good of a system for trade, taxation, economic growth or really any
aspect of human flourishing? Can it really be that an almost 380-yearold technology is the best tool we have for approaching these problems?

2.3 Are nation states bad at everything?
Our point here is not that nation states have been bad at stopping
genocide and atrocities and religious oppression, which, let us remember, is the task for which they were originally created. Our point is that
they seem to be bad at everything.
Consider the issue of national currencies. If nation states have failed
to protect human rights and minimise acts of genocide around the
world, are they at least good at setting up national currencies with which
people can carry out economic activities? Sadly, no. Currencies, under
the control of nation states, have been notorious failures. There has been
a litany of famous cases in which currencies have collapsed utterly.
The most famous case, of course, is the collapse of the German
currency in the Weimar Republic after World War I. As the pseudonymous writer Peruvian Bull notes in his book The Dollar Endgame:
Hyperinflation is Coming, inflation reached rates of more than 30,000%,
meaning that prices doubled every few days. People burned paper currency to stay warm, as it had less value than the wood from which it
was made.
That might be the most famous case, but it was hardly an isolated example. Again, Bull observes that economists estimate that the
annual inflation rate in Hungary reached 41.9 quadrillion percent after
World War II. This means that prices in Hungary doubled approximately every fifteen hours. There is a seemingly endless supply of additional cases. In 2008, Zimbabwe famously had to start printing bills


with denominations greater than a trillion. Other recent hyperinflation
casualties included the Greek drachma (1941–1944), the Chinese yuan
(1947–1949), the Chilean escudo (1971–1974), the Argentine peso
(1975–1992), the Peruvian sol (1985–1991 and 1992–2003), the Yugoslavian dinar (1992–1995), the Belarusian ruble (1992–2003) and the
Angolan kwanza (1999). Even when the result is not hyperinflation, a
modest inflation rate of 2% can wipe out family wealth within 100 years
if it is kept in the national currency.
Bull notes that ‘an eventual collapse of fiat currency is the norm, not
the exception’ and adds:
In a study of 775 fiat currencies created over the last 500 years,
researchers found that approximately 599 have failed, leaving
only 176 remaining in circulation. Approximately 20% of the
775 fiat currencies examined failed due to hyperinflation, 21%
were destroyed in war, and 24% percent [sic] were reformed
through centralized monetary policy. The remainder were
either phased out, converted into another currency, or are still
around today.
More poignantly, Peruvian Bull adds that ‘the average lifespan for
a pure fiat currency is only 27 years’11 – much shorter than a typical
human life.12
This does not mean that earlier forms of human organisation fared
much better with monetary integrity. The Roman Emperor Diocletian
diluted the amount of silver in the Roman coin, the denarius, leading to
one of the first recorded examples of hyperinflation. However, our point
is not that hyperinflation is unique to nation states; it is rather that
nation states have not been effective in forestalling such phenomena. In
fact, they have made hyperinflation quite common in today’s world. All
Peruvian Bull, The Dollar Endgame: Hyperinflation Is Coming (2023).
For a list of specific cases, see <https://www.cato.org/sites/cato.org/files/pubs/pdf/hankekrus-hyperinflation-table-may-2013.pdf>.


of this is to ask why currencies should be under the control of nation
states at all.
In her recent book Money is Broken, Lyn Alden makes an interesting observation about the inevitability of nation states debasing their
currencies. Thanks to centralised national currencies, nation states can
undertake actions that would otherwise call for the levying of new
taxes. However, rather than face that political challenge, it is easier to
print more money, thereby diluting the value of their currency with the
effect of syphoning away the wealth of their citizens. Ultimately, this
path continues until the wealth of the nation is exhausted.13
The other interesting observation that Alden makes is that the
debasing of national currencies is central to the capacity of nation states
to wage war. In many (perhaps most) cases, the loser of the war is the
power that exhausts the wealth of its people first. In special cases, like
the United States, which currently holds the world’s reserve currency,
the wealth of the whole world – at least every nation holding dollars – is
tapped to execute its military operations. In this case, there is no threat
of being exhausted first, but there is a definite danger that a state can
lose its reserve currency status by constantly destabilising its currency at
the expense of its holders and users.
One might think that the problem is not with nation states per
se but rather with central bankers printing money or with the failure
to link units of currency to gold or silver, but these are just symptoms of the problem. Of course, we know how to avoid hyperinflation; the problem is that nation states, when they have control of
their currencies, feel that they are free to print money to avoid the
economic problems that they face. These phenomena are symptoms
of the deeper problem, which is that we are operating with obsolete
methods of human organisation.

Lyn Alden, Broken Money: Why Our Financial System is Failing Us and How We Can Make
it Better (New York, NY, 2023).


2.4 Questioning sovereignty
This observation is not unique to us. For these reasons and others,
the idea of the sovereign nation state has been unravelling for some
time. Consider the issue of sovereignty itself to begin with. Not surprisingly, in response to events like the Rwandan genocide, people
have begun to question the wisdom of state sovereignty. The growing recognition of universal human rights has challenged the idea
that a nation’s internal affairs are solely its own business. Quite sensibly, many thinkers now argue that human rights abuses should be
addressed by the international community, even if they occur within
the borders of a sovereign state.14
The concern about sovereignty has not only been driven by cases
like Rwanda; there is a growing list of issues that are undermining the
idea of national sovereignty. In the discussion that follows, we touch on
a few of these issues, and our point is that these issues, whether or not
you believe in them or consider them important, are driving wedges
into the material integrity of nation states across the globe. They are
breaking the Westphalian order.
For example, environmental issues, such as pollution, are transnational in scope and are leading to actions that undermine nation-state
sovereignty. It is clear why this would happen. Poisoned air and water
are not contained by borders. No one simply pollutes their own air or
their own water because air and water do not recognise the boundaries of nation states. If poisonous chemicals are dumped into a nation’s
river systems, they soon find their way into the world’s oceans. It is
thus a problem that transcends the boundaries of Westphalian nation
states. And new centralised powers in our world are undoing aspects of
national sovereignty in order to address these issues.
See Chapter 10 for further discussion on the new varieties of sovereignty that will emerge
in a post-state future, including those that will reshape our understanding of human rights
and how they should be defended.


Similarly, on the economic front, regional blocs and trade agreements can be used (and are being used) to limit a nation’s ability to
fully exercise its sovereignty. If you enter into a trade agreement with
another country, there will be disputes, and it is folly to think that you
alone get to call the shots when resolving those disputes. International
agreements, as structured today, require the relinquishing of at least
some sovereignty to international adjudicators.
Finally, the rise of global security threats has led some to argue
that traditional sovereignty is out of touch with respect to the reality
of conflict today. The rise of non-state actors and transnational threats,
such as terrorism and narcotrafficking, has led many to conclude that
no country can fully protect itself without ceding some of its security
operations to other states or to new forms of centralised authority.
All of these concerns are, of course, reflected in recent international
law. The growth of international institutions such as the International
Criminal Court and the International Court of Justice has, by their very
existence, carved out exceptions to absolute national sovereignty. These
institutions are not toothless and they can and do limit a nation’s ability
to act unilaterally in certain areas, such as human rights and war crimes.
These are all cases in which nation states have had to cede some of
their sovereignty to larger groups of nations or, at a minimum, to other
nations. However, things cut in the other direction, too. Nation states
are also losing sovereignty to smaller groups within their borders as well
as to transnational groups that do not recognise national borders at all.
Nation states and familiar international organisations like the UN
are no longer the only available option as far as global governance is
concerned. There has been a Cambrian explosion in new forms of governance on the global stage, and there is an interesting question as to
whether traditional nation states (and organisations of nation states)
will even have a place in the new global environment. They are certainly
no longer the only players at the table.
We can start with some dramatic cases. We often overlook the
global scope and power of international drug cartels like the Cártel de


Sinaloa (Sinaloa Cartel) in Mexico and the now-defunct Cártel de Cali
(Cali Cartel) in Colombia. They operate across multiple borders and
have significant economic and political power. It is fair to say that in
many parts of Mexico, the cartels are the de facto governing authority.
This is true even for the less powerful cartels.
Until his death in 2014, Nazario Moreno González – aka El
Chayo,15 aka El Dulce (The Candy), aka El Más Loco (The Craziest) and sometimes known as Emiliano Morelos Guevara16 – ran an
evangelical Christian mission and narcotics trafficking operation, La
Familia Michoacana, which ultimately evolved into a narcotrafficking
organisation known as Los Caballeros Templarios (The Knights Templar). Under his stewardship, the two successive cartels flourished economically, but they also served as a nongovernmental aid programme
to the indigent and as the de facto government for many of the citizens
of the Mexican state of Michoacán. As we shall see, they also created
problems for people living within their area of control.
On the business end, González’s cartels were involved in the manufacture and export (to the United States) of methamphetamines but
also in the mining of iron ore for sale to China. The Mexican government said that the iron ore mining was illegal. That did not seem
to phase González, who sold the ore anyway and distributed some of
the proceeds to the poor in Michoacán. He also gave loans to farmers, funded schools and churches and, in general, provided the kinds
of services that governments were supposed to provide but which the
official Mexican government was not willing or able to do. It is no surprise that, on his death, he became an unofficial saint and to this day is
venerated as San Nazario.17
Chayo is the diminutive of Nazario.
Emiliano as in Emiliano Zapata, Morelos as in José María Morelos and Guevara as in Che.
On the spiritual end, Nazario required his followers to carry a ‘spiritual manual’ that
provided helpful advice about self-improvement. For example: ‘Don’t view your obstacles
as problems, but accept them and discover in them the opportunity to improve yourself.’
His writings also called for his followers to abstain from the use of alcoholic beverages and


Cases like this call us to rethink where the real power resides in
today’s world. For example, in many parts of the world, terrorist organisations have more actual control over terrestrial regions than do the
nation states in which they operate. Groups such as Al-Qaeda, ISIS
and Boko Haram operate in multiple countries and have their own
political ideologies and agendas, which are not aligned with any of the
nation states in which they operate.
In a Guardian essay aptly titled ‘The Demise of the Nation State’,
Rana Dasgupta notes that the adherents of such organisations ‘have
lost the enchantment for the old slogans of nation-building.’ Instead,
‘their political technology is charismatic religion, and the future they
seek is inspired by the ancient golden empires that existed before the
invention of nations.’ The most telling part of the story is how terrorist
organisations rework the plumbing of global governance, completely
indifferent to the borders of nation states. They are not interested in
seizing the state apparatus, but ‘instead, they cut holes and tunnels in
state authority, and so assemble transnational networks of tax collection, trade routes and military supply lines.’ The networks they build are
impressive, tunnelling under the purview of nation states ‘from Mauritania in the west to Yemen in the east, and from Kenya and Somalia in
the south to Algeria and Syria in the north.’18
Like the Mexican cartels, terrorist organisations also take on
many roles of governing institutions, or at least try to. Thus, they take
on infrastructure projects, project taxing authority and, like the Los
Caballeros Templarios, provide social services to local populations.
Whether it is out of the goodness of their hearts or to capture the
drugs, to not sell drugs to anyone except gringos, to treat women with respect, and to beat
thieves. The manual, which became known in Michoacán as ‘The Sayings of the Craziest
One’, called for humility, service, wisdom, brotherhood, courage, and obedience to God and
his agents on Earth – namely, La Familia Michoacana and, subsequently, Los Caballeros
Templarios.
Rana Dasgupta, ‘The Demise of the Nation State’, The Guardian, 5 April 2018 <https://
www.theguardian.com/news/2018/apr/05/demise-of-the-nation-state-rana-dasgupta>
[accessed 30 April 2023].


hearts and minds of their subjects is beside the point. What is critical
for our discussion is how nation states have become almost invisible
to these organisations.19
Meanwhile, transnational corporations (TNCs) are doing a ‘legitimate’ version of the same thing – tunnelling under and around nation
states and taking over the roles that nation states once performed.
TNCs have become increasingly powerful and influential in global
affairs, operating across multiple countries and regions, often with more
economic and political clout than many states. Sometimes, they have
come under criticism for flexing their power by involving themselves in
what is traditionally the province of governments.
We can start with a relatively benign example. Shell, the multinational oil and gas company, has played a quasi-governmental role in
the Niger Delta region of Nigeria, where it has operated for decades.
While it did not exactly replace the Nigerian government, it did play a
major role as a kind of police force working with the national government. It was accused of sharing intelligence with the Nigerian security
forces, allowing them to carry out operations against local communities
and activists. Shell was also accused of providing financial support and
logistical assistance to the security forces, including transporting soldiers and equipment to areas where they were carrying out operations.20
Cases like this are just a small part of the story, given that corporations today are bypassing nation states in their traditional domain
of controlling the flow of money within their borders. Those borders
are nearly invisible to TNCs, and TNCs do their best to cut nation
states out of the loop entirely. Dasgupta notes that TNCs are specifically designed to avoid nation-state taxation systems. In 2018, 94% of
Apple’s cash reserves were held offshore, which means that the amount
of money Apple offshored was $250 billion – more than the combined
Michael Weiss and Hassan Hassan, ISIS: Inside the Army of Terror (New York, NY, 2015).
Amnesty International, Amnesty International Report 2017/2018: The State of the World’s
Human Rights (London, 2018) <https://www.amnesty.org/en/wp-content/uploads/2021/05/
POL1067002018ENGLISH.pdf>.


foreign reserves of the British government and the Bank of England.
However, it is not just about money. As Dasgupta notes, big data companies like Google and Facebook have ‘already assumed many functions
previously associated with the state, from cartography to surveillance.’21
Even some nongovernmental organisations (NGOs) have become
quite powerful on the global stage. NGOs, of course, are independent
organisations that advance specific causes, such as human rights, environmental protection or economic development. They often operate
on a global scale and can have a significant impact on policymaking.
Famous examples include Médecins Sans Frontières (better known in
the Anglophone world as Doctors Without Borders), Oxfam International, CARE International, Save the Children, Amnesty International,
Human Rights Watch and Transparency International. These are all
perhaps worthy organisations, but they have been criticised for usurping roles that traditionally belonged to national governments.
For example, Dani Rodrik, an economist at Harvard University’s
John F. Kennedy School of Government, has argued that NGOs may
undermine the development of strong, accountable government institutions. He claims that ‘by substituting for government in the provision
of basic public goods and services, NGOs risk diminishing the incentives and capacity of governments to deliver these services themselves.’22
Dean Karlan and Christopher Udry, codirectors of Kellogg’s Global
Poverty Research Lab, subsequently investigated whether it was true
that NGOs could ‘crowd out’ governments. They summarised studies of
aid groups in Ghana and Uganda and concluded that in those nations,
‘government funding decreased by 6.8% in the sectors where the NGO
was active, even as it increased by 7.4% in areas where the NGO was
not focused. This indicated that money was flowing away from the government institutions that villagers had previously relied upon and into
Dasgupta, ‘The Demise of the Nation State’.
Dani Rodrik, ‘Populism and the Economics of Globalization’, Journal of International
Business Policy, 1 (2018), 12–33 <https://doi.org/10.1057/s42214-018-0001-4> [accessed
30 April 2023].


the new programmes and services sponsored by the NGO – yet these
new programmes and services were less effective at improving people’s
well-being.’23
We are not here to judge whether NGOs, on balance, do good or
bad work. Our point is merely that they end up doing the work that was
traditionally done by governments, for better or for worse. They are just
another example of how the function of governance on the global stage
is being taken over by new actors.
We are also not the first to notice this. In fact, some authors have
pointed to the rise of transnational policy networks (TPNs) or, as they
are sometimes called, ‘informal governance’. As Oliver Westerwinter,
Kenneth W. Abbott and Thomas Biersteker note, ‘There is a growing
and increasingly broad-based consensus that it is no longer possible to
focus exclusively, or even predominantly, on states and their interactions
in intergovernmental organizations to comprehend, understand, and
analyze contemporary global governance.’24 Their view is that TPNs
of informal governance mechanisms are replacing traditional organisations like the United Nations and the African Union because those
organisations view the world at the wrong level of granularity – they
believe that states still hold the power in today’s world. However, as we
look at case after case, we see this is not so.
For another challenge to nation-state sovereignty, we can examine the phenomenon of city networks. Some cities have formed networks to collaborate on issues such as urban planning, climate change
and economic development. Examples include the C40 Cities Climate
Leadership Group and the Global Parliament of Mayors (GPM) – an

Katie Gilbert, ‘Why Well-Meaning NGOs Sometimes Do More Harm Than Good’,
Kellogg Insight, 2020 <https://insight.kellogg.northwestern.edu/article/international-aiddevelopment-ngos-crowding-out-government> [accessed 30 April 2023].
Thomas Biersteker, ‘Global Governance in Peril?’, Global Challenges, 2020 <https://globalchallenges.ch/issue/7/transnational-policy-networks-and-contemporary-global-governance/> [accessed 8 October 2023].


organisation that has over 1,000 mayors and city leaders from more
than 130 countries as members.
The GPM is a particularly interesting case. The organisation was
inspired by a 2013 book by Benjamin Barber, entitled If Mayors Ruled
the World: Dysfunctional Nations, Rising Cities. And one can see why
mayors like the ideas in the book.
Nation-states have made little progress toward global governance. Too inclined by their nature to rivalry and mutual exclusion, they seem quintessentially indisposed to cooperation and
incapable of establishing global common goods. Moreover,
democracy is locked in their tight embrace, and there seems
little chance either for democratizing globalization or for globalizing democracy as long as its flourishing depends on rival
sovereign nations. What then is to be done? The solution stands
before us, obvious but largely uncharted: let cities, the most
networked and interconnected of our political associations,
defined above all by collaboration and pragmatism, by creativity and multiculture, do what states cannot. Let mayors rule
the world. Since, as Edward Glaeser writes, ‘the strength that
comes from human collaboration is the central truth behind
civilization’s success and the primary reason why cities exist,’
then surely cities can and should govern globally.25
And to be sure, this attitude is not just talk. Mayors have organised
their own climate initiatives and their own approaches to problems of
illegal immigration and drug trafficking.
Climate change is the most salient example. Former Chicago
Mayor Rahm Emanuel issued a news release after a 2017 summit of
mayors on climate change, stating, ‘Even as Washington fails to act,
Benjamin R. Barber, If Mayors Ruled the World: Dysfunctional Nations, Rising Cities (New
Haven, CT, 2013).


cities have the power and will to take decisive action’. Former New
York Mayor Michael Bloomberg, also a leading figure in the movement, put a sharper spin on the idea. ‘All the U.S. cities signing the
Chicago Climate Charter [. . .] sends a strong signal to the world that
we will keep moving forward toward our Paris goal, with or without
Washington.’26
Of course, this did not pass without criticism. Mark Anderson,
a climate change sceptic writing in the UK Column, complained that
‘these “climate mayors” have little or no qualm about usurping the role
of national leaders. [. . .] this “grassroots globalism”, if you will, appears
to be a revolutionary means of undercutting national authority from the
bottom up.’27
As you have probably guessed, our point is not about climate change
or the rightness of mayors and networks of mayors seizing sovereignty
from nation states. It is, of course, that this is yet another example of
how the sovereignty of nation states is unravelling.
As nation states unravel, or rather, as the very idea of the nation
state unravels, new forms of governance are emerging in unlikely places.
For instance, there is the important example of so-called ‘stateless
nations’. These are ethnic or cultural groups that have distinct identities
and aspirations for self-rule but do not have a recognised nation state.
Examples include the Kurds, Palestinians and Basques. Do they have
their own state-independent form of governance? Absolutely yes.
Dasgupta draws attention to the fact that these stateless nations are
constructing governance mechanisms and their own forms of sovereignty from the detritus of the collapse of nation states. He notes that
Office of the Mayor, ‘Mayor Emanuel and Global Mayors Sign the Chicago Climate
Charter at the North American Climate Summit’, Chicago.org, 2017 <https://www.
chicago.gov/city/en/depts/mayor/press_room/press_releases/2017/december/ChicagoClimateSummitCharter.html> [accessed 28 October 2024].
Mark Anderson, ‘Mayors Usurping Nation States in Quest to Fight “Climate Change”’,
UK Column, 20 December 2017 <https://www.ukcolumn.org/article/mayors-usurpingnation-states-quest-fight-climate-change> [accessed 30 April 2023].


‘several ethnic groups, meanwhile – such as the Kurds and the Tuareg –
which were left without a homeland after decolonisation, and stranded
as persecuted minorities ever since, have also exploited the rifts in state
authority to assemble the beginnings of transnational territories.’ He
adds that ‘it is in the world’s most dangerous regions that today’s new
political possibilities are being imagined.’28
We have not even arrived at what is probably the most impactful
example – special economic zones or special enterprise zones (SEZs).
These are designated geographic areas within a country that are given
preferential treatment to attract foreign investment and promote economic growth. Examples include Shenzhen in China, Dubai in the
UAE and the Suez Canal Economic Zone in Egypt. Quite voluntarily,
nation states have ceded authority over law enforcement, taxation and
the provisioning of infrastructure to these SEZs.
Earlier, we mentioned the book Your Next Government by Tom W.
Bell. It goes into great detail about the recent rise of SEZs and their
place in today’s world. However, one of the critical remaining questions is why nation states would cede so much authority to SEZs, and
the answer seems to be that nation states, as evidence of their collapsing authority, are all too happy to cede the actual business of governing – providing services, fixing potholes and so on – as long as they
retain the critical component of governance – the ability to control
how favours are distributed and thus how favours are returned. This is
a point we will return to later when we dive deeper into the forms of
corruption that have often accompanied the presence of SEZs around
the world.
We should also mention the rise of micronations. These are selfproclaimed independent nations that are not recognised by the international community. They often operate on a small scale and have unique
political systems, such as the Principality of Sealand in the UK or the
Republic of Molossia in the US. More recently, people have proposed

Dasgupta, ‘The Demise of the Nation State’.


and are currently involved in trial efforts to make new micronations in
the form of seasteading operations in international waters.29
We could cite additional examples, but you get the point. Nation
states are losing their sovereignty (sometimes voluntarily), and many of
their fundamental functions – security, taxation, monetary policy, climate initiatives, welfare, industrial policy and so on – are being taken
over by other governmental institutions. And the source of this pressure
is the aforementioned Cambrian explosion of organisations and institutions that are taking on the role of traditional nation states – TNCs,
NGOs, terrorist organisations, networked cities, stateless nations, drug
cartels, SEZs, micronations and more.
The aggregate effect of these new organisations on the future of the
nation state should not be dismissed. As Sean McFate, writing in The
New Rules for War, put it:
The Westphalian Order is dying. Today states are receding
everywhere, a sure sign of disorder. From the weakening European Union to the raging Middle East, states are breaking down
into regimes or are manifestly failing. They are being replaced
by other things, such as networks, caliphates, narco-states, warlord kingdoms, corporatocracies, and wastelands. The Fragile
States Index, an annual ranking of 178 countries that measures
state weakness using social science methods, warned in 2017
that 70 percent of the world’s countries were ‘fragile.’ This trend
continues to worsen. The ability of the United Nations or the
West to police the situation fades each year, while nonstate
actors grow more powerful. International relations are returning to the chaos of pre-Westphalian days.30

‘The Seasteading Institute’ <https://www.seasteading.org/> [accessed 28 October 2024].
Sean McFate, The New Rules of War: Victory in the Age of Durable Disorder (New York,
NY, 2019), 42.


Whether we consider these developments to be good or bad, the
important point is this: it is now myopic to only consider traditional
governance structures like nation states when we think about the
principal actors in human governance on the global stage. The point
is that a lot of individuals and a lot of institutions have seen the writing on the wall for national sovereignty, but the question is, have they
also seen the writing on the wall for the idea of the nation state itself ?
Not exactly.

2.5 Searching for alternatives
There is a prevailing view that the nation state can still be saved – that it
can coexist with all these competitors and that what we need is a global
level of governance to tie things together, keeping nation states in the
game but with diminished roles.
According to this view, global governance would complement
and enhance the existing system of nation states.31 Sometimes, this
takes the form of what Anne-Marie Slaughter has called ‘networked
governance’.32 She proposes a model of governance that involves
multiple actors, including states, non-state actors and international
organisations, collaborating to solve problems through networks of
connections.
Similarly, Robert Keohane has developed the concept of ‘complex
interdependence’. His idea is that as the world becomes more interconnected, the traditional system of states interacting through military
force and economic coercion is no longer sufficient to address global
challenges. As a solution, he proposes a model of governance based on
cooperation and mutual dependence among states – this is the complex
David Held and Anthony McGrew, eds., Governing Globalization: Power, Authority and
Global Governance (Cambridge, 2002).
Anne-Marie Slaughter, The Chessboard and the Web: Strategies of Connection in a Networked
World (New Haven, CT, 2017).


interdependence idea. Key to this is the need for global governance
mechanisms to manage this interdependence.33
For the most part, such theorists, while critical of traditional notions
of sovereignty, have argued that more layers of centralised governance,
such as global or regional governance, are necessary to address the challenges posed by globalisation and promote cooperation among states.
They see these forms of governance as complementary to, rather than a
replacement for, the existing system of nation states. However, from a
centraliser-versus-decentraliser perspective, one could say that they are
more of the same.
In other words, even if we adopt a system of global governance structures designed to ameliorate the problems with national
sovereignty, those structures can create precisely the same problems
at a second-order level. They are, if you will, meta states and, as such,
inherit the same problems that traditional nation states have had. They
represent the same points of failure, invitations to corruption and
opportunities for centralised hegemony.
For example, the United Nations, for all the good it does in the
world, is very much a centralised institution. It is no stranger to bureaucratic failures and incidents of corruption and seems unable to prevent
or halt episodes of violence and genocide. The same can be said of all
international organisations and courts. They are just another layer of
centralisation, and adding a meta layer does not solve the problems
inherent to centralisation if the meta layer is centralised as well. A
cocktail of such organisations, mixed with traditional nation states, is
not the answer.
Even if we like the cocktail, we need to consider its individual
ingredients. Just because they are not nation states does not mean that
they cannot have the same weaknesses as nation states. They can all be
either centralised or decentralised in their internal structure.
Robert O. Keohane, After Hegemony: Cooperation and Discord in the World Political Economy (Princeton, NJ, 2005).


In view of the chequered history of the nation state and the proliferation of alternative forms of governance, we think it is time to rethink
traditional conceptions of government at the global (and local) level.
Let us face it: nation states were not a particularly good idea at their
inception, and after 377 years of tinkering with the formula, they are
still a bad idea. The good news is that there is no universal law insisting
that we organise ourselves within nation states or even that traditional
nation states need to be part of the new equation. Maybe they were a
noble experiment; we can argue about that. But the point is that today,
we have alternatives – better alternatives. And we should avail ourselves
of those better alternatives.
Those better alternatives are not necessarily the new players in the
international order. Some of those new players are simply offering new
attempts at centralised solutions. Some of them are actually very old
attempts at centralised solutions (as when terrorist organisations call
for caliphates, for example). They are symptoms of the underlying problem rather than the solution to that problem.
So, what is the alternative? Are we going to advocate for a new
version of kingdoms? Tribes? City states? Empires? Those alternatives
were not particularly successful either. Do not worry; we are not going
to propose rolling back the clock to an imaginary age of better forms
of government. What we are proposing is the utilisation of blockchain
technologies as the scaffolding of new, more effective forms of government. Our goal is to show how blockchain governance can lay the
foundations for a broad range of governmental alternatives, including a
reimagining of the nation state.
In the subsequent chapters, we will sketch an alternative to traditional governance – one in which people are organised in a decentralised-yet-cooperative manner, one in which governments operate
transparently and in which people retain their privacy, and one in which
individuals maintain their sovereignty and in which they are free to exit
from communities that do not align with their values. If all this sounds
too good to be true, it means you have been paying attention. It does


sound too good to be true, and we have a lot of work to do to explain
how all of this is possible.
To see where we are headed, recall the issue that started this chapter – the way in which nation states tend to kettle together people of
conflicting interests and values. The good news is that we do not actually have to lock people of conflicting values together within a single,
unified governance structure. Sunnis and Shiites, Catholics and Protestants, Tutsis and Hutus do not need to be forced together and told they
must fight over who controls the levers of power.
Our idea is that any start over should utilise communities organised
around blockchain technology, taking communities in the very broad
sense of any group of individuals that need to cooperate towards some
common interest. The central idea driving our thesis is that the use of
blockchain technology can enable distributed-yet-cooperative organisation. This will open up a whole new basket of questions, of course.
How will all these blockchain communities be organised with each
other? What happens when they come into conflict? Do they overlap
in function? How are we to understand sovereignty going forward?
We will get to these questions soon enough, but first, we need to
examine the nature of the problem with nation states and why many of
the new alternative forms of governance fail to provide a solution.

